
=== PDF page 95 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual84
PRESET PROGRAMMING
The Tone filter is a simple low-pass tone control which can be used to
darken the tone of an instrument. The Z-Plane filter is an ultra-
powerful synthesizer filter which can dramatically alter the sound of
an instrument.
To understand how a filter works we need to understand what makes
up a sound wave. A sine wave is the simplest form of sound wave. Any
waveform except a sine wave can be analyzed as a mix of sine waves at
specific frequencies and amplitudes.
One way to represent complex waveforms is to use a chart with fre-
quency on one axis and amplitude on the other. Each vertical line of
the chart represents one sine wave at a specific amplitude and
frequency.
20
40
60
80
100
40 80 160 360 720 1440 2880
Frequency
...
Amplitude
Any waveform can be analyzed as a mixture of sine waves.
FILTER MODULATION
The block diagram of a single channel is shown below.
R
L
PanInstrument Tone DCAMorph
Filter
=== PDF page 96 ===
Chapter 7: Preset Programming 85
PRESET PROGRAMMING
A filter that lets only the high frequencies pass is called a High Pass
Filter.
A filter which only lets a certain band of frequencies pass is called a
Bandpass Filter.
WHAT IS A FILTER?
Most of the instruments in Morpheus are complex waves containing
many sine waves of various amplitudes and frequencies. A filter is a
device which allows us to remove certain components of a sound
depending on its frequency. For example, a Low Pass Filter lets the
low frequencies pass and removes only the high frequencies.
20
40
60
80
100
40 80 160 360 720 1440 2880
Frequency
...
Amplitude
Output of Filter
Low Pass
Filter
Cutoff Frequency
20
40
60
80
100
40 80 160 360 720 1440 2880
Frequency
...
Amplitude
Filter Output
Initial Frequency
High Pass
Filter
20
40
60
80
100
40 80 160 360 720 1440 2880
Frequency
...
Amplitude
Center Frequency
Filter
Output
Band Pass
Filter
=== PDF page 97 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual86
PRESET PROGRAMMING
A Notch Filter is just the opposite of a bandpass filter and is used to
eliminate a narrow band of frequencies.
Another control found on traditional filters is called Q or resonance. A
lowpass filter with a high Q would emphasize the frequencies around
the cutoff frequency. The chart below shows how different amounts of
Q affect the low pass filter response. In terms of sound, frequencies
around the cutoff will tend to “ring” with high Q settings. If the filter
is slowly swept back and forth, with a high Q, various overtones will
be “picked out” of the sound and amplified as the resonant peak
sweeps over them. Bells and gongs are real world examples of sounds
which have a high Q.
Another parameter on a filter is the number of poles it contains.
Traditional synthesizer filters were usually either 2-pole or 4-pole
filters. The number of poles in a filter describes the steepness of its
slope. The more poles, the steeper the filter's slope and the stronger
the filtering action. The tone controls on your home stereo are prob-
ably one-pole or two-pole filters. Parametric equalizers are usually
either two-pole or three-pole filters. In terms of vintage synthesizers,
Moog and ARP synthesizer filters used 4-pole filters, Oberheim synthe-
sizers were famous for their 2-pole filter sound.
Frequency
Amplitude 4-pole
Lowpass
2-pole
Lowpass
Frequency
Amplitude
Low Q Med Q High Q
=== PDF page 98 ===
Chapter 7: Preset Programming 87
PRESET PROGRAMMING
Using a filter, we now have a way to control the harmonic content of
a sampled sound. As it turns out, even a simple low pass filter can
simulate the response of many natural sounds.
For example, when a piano string is struck by its hammer, there are
initially a lot of high frequencies present. If the same note is played
softer, there will be fewer of the high frequencies generated by the
string. We can simulate this effect by routing the velocity of the
keyboard to control the amount of high frequencies that the low pass
filter lets through. The result is expressive, natural control over the
sound.
If an envelope generator is used to control the cutoff frequency of a
low pass filter, the frequency content can be varied dynamically over
the course of the note. This can add animation to the sound as well as
simulate the response of many natural instruments.
PARAMETRIC FILTERS
A more complex type of filter is called a parametric filter. A parametric
filter gives you control over three basic parameters of the filter. The
three parameters are: Frequency, Bandwidth, and Boost/Cut. The Fre-
quency parameter allows you to select a range of frequencies to be
boosted or cut, the Bandwidth parameter allows you to select the
width of the range, and the Boost/Cut parameter either boosts or cuts
the frequencies within the selected band by a specified amount. Fre-
quencies not included in the selected band are left unaltered. This is
different from a band pass filter which attenuates (reduces) frequencies
outside the selected band.
Boost
Cut
Freq.
0 dB
+18 dB
-18 dB
Bandwidth
Frequency
Amplitude
Parametric
Filter
The parametric filter is quite flexible. Any range of frequencies can be
either amplified or attenuated. Often times, several parametric sec-
tions are cascaded (placed one after another) in order to create com-
plex filter response curves.
=== PDF page 99 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual88
PRESET PROGRAMMING
If four parametric filter sections were cascaded, it would be possible to
create the following complex filter response.
Many natural instruments have complex resonances which are based
on their soundboard or tube size. The resonance shown above would
be impossible to create using a normal synthesizer filter.
THE MORPHEUS FILTER
The Morpheus filter is actually much more complex than the four
parametric sections described above. As an example of its power, the
diagram below shows one of the possible ways that the Morpheus
filter can be configured. This amount of filtering is unprecedented in
all of electronic music history. (Especially when you consider that we
are only talking about one of the 32 channels.)
10
Linear Frequency - Hertz
dB Magnitude
-5
0
5
15
20
500 10,000 15,000 20,000
4 Parametric Equalizers
Right away you can see that we now have 20 different parameters to
control. Ah, there's the catch. How can all these parameters be effec-
tively controlled? 20 envelope generators? We don't think so.
In Out
6 Parametric Equalizer Sections1 Low Pass
Section
Fc Q Fc Bw
Gain
Fc Bw
Gain
Fc Bw
Gain
Fc Bw
Gain
Fc Bw
Gain
Fc Bw
Gain
=== PDF page 185 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual174
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
The Z-Plane filters are categorized into groups of: Flangers, Vowel
Filters, Traditional Filters, Parametric Filters, Instrument Models, etc. A
suffix of “4” or “.4” indicates filter is square, not cube and does not
contain a Transform 2 axis.
FLANGERS
Members of this filter family contain a series of notches with various
depths, widths and frequencies. The traditional flange effect is created
by sweeping different frequency notches with a real time controller.
Another application for flangers is enhanced dynamic expression at
note-on by using velocity to modulate the frequencies of the notches
and overall cut-off. These filters can simulate different pick positions
on guitar strings and various locations of drum, mallet and cymbal
strikes, etc.
F000 Null Filter
F001 Low Pass Flange .4
Morph: Starts with high end roll-off and deep, narrow notches at
500Hz, 100Hz, 200Hz, 400Hz and 800Hz and transforms into less
deep, wider notches at 11799Hz, 13813Hz, 16169Hz, 17495Hz and
18928Hz with no roll-off.
Freq. Tracking: Moves the notches in the first frame of the Morph
axis up two octaves. The second frame is completely flat. Tracks
filter to keyboard frequencies with Note-on key assignment.
Controls brightness.
Transform 2: Not used.
F002 Low Pass Flange Bk .4
A series of deep notches spaced at octave intervals morphing to
less severe, more closely clustered high frequency notches. An
additional lowpass filter is at the start of the Morph, opening as
the maximum offset is reached.
Morph: Modulate this to create multi-flanging effects.
Freq. Tracking: Tracks flangers across the keyboard. Velocity con-
trols brightness.
Transform 2: Not used.
F003 Flange 2 .4
This flanger has a series of 6 notches placed at octaves, not lin-
early. Frame 1 starts with notches at 50, 100, 200, 400, 800, and
1600Hz.
Morph: Moves all of the notches up in frequency to above 10kHz,
with decreasing depth. This means that the deepest flanging effect
is obtained in the first 1/3 to 1/2 of the morph parameter range.
Note that deep notches can cut out the fundamental of a sound
which might decrease the volume of the note.
Freq. Tracking: Moves the notches to 400, 800, 1600, 3200, 6400,
12800Hz, which allows key tracking to keep the “sweet spot” of
the flanger centered over the harmonics of the note.
Transform 2: Not used.
=== PDF page 186 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 175
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F004 CubeFlanger
A flanging filter featuring deep notches tuned in octaves and a
steep roll-off of high frequencies when all axes have no offset.
High settings for Transform 2 can produce some rather metallic-
sounding overtones. Apart from flanging effects, this filter can be
used in much the same way as a standard resonant synth filter.
Morph:  Tunes the filter notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls lowpass filter cutoff point.
Transform 2:  Increases resonance and introduces some peaks.
F005 Flange3.4
Notches are spaced at a ratio of 1.61 between notch frequencies,
starting at 40Hz. This spacing means that notches will not fall on
top of all of the harmonics of a sound at once. Instead, they
should hit harmonics one at a time as they are swept in frequency.
Traditional flangers have notches spaced linearly, not log spaced.
Morph: Moves all of the notches up above 10kHz, with the relative
frequency spacing decreasing. The deepest flange effect will hap-
pen in the lower 1/3 to 1/5 of the morph parameter range.
Freq. Tracking:  Sets the initial tuning of the notches, moving all of
the notches up from 40Hz to 325Hz as the base frequency.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F006 Flange 4.4
A highly resonant flanger /filter type. Sweeping the Morph axis
produces dramatic effects. The Filter Frequency Track parameter
can be used to tune the flanger; higher values produce more open
sounds.
Morph: Increase to raise the cutoff frequency and vary the gain of
the various peaks and notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F007 Flange 5
A complex flange possessing some vocal-sounding characteristics.
Sweeping along the Morph or Freq. Track axes produces flanger-
like effects.
Morph:  Tunes the notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Spreads the notches.
Transform 2:  Increase this to move the filter toward a more flat
curve.
F008 Flange 6.4
Introduces both peaks and notches which start widely spaced and
become more tightly distributed as Morph Offset reaches maxi-
mum. The center frequencies for the various filter bands move
towards higher ranges as the Morph or Filter Freq. Track param-
eters are swept upward; the effect is not unlike a sweeping of
multiple resonant band-pass filters.
=== PDF page 187 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual176
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F009 Flange 6R.4
This is a variation of filter 008, Flange 6.4. It is a bit more reso-
nant-sounding, due in part to higher ‘Q’ settings. Sweeping the
Morph axis can produce the syllable ‘yi’.
Morph:  Sweep filter frequency bands up and together when
modulated in a positive direction.
Freq. Tracking:  Sweep filter frequency bands up and together when
modulated in a positive direction.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F010 Flanger 7.4
A series of harmonically related notches is moved from the lower-
midrange to the upper-midrange as this filter is moved along the
Frequency Tracking axis. Morphing brings in the flanging effect
Morph:  Use this to sweep the notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Use this to tune the notches.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F011 BriteFlnge.4
A series of notches, tuned in octaves, are swept upward and finally
converge at 19.5kHz as this filter is pushed up along the Morph
axis. A small bump at about 15kHz is introduced to maintain
brightness when Morph is at completely offset.
Morph:  Increasing this value sweeps the filter notches upward and
together.
Freq. Tracking:  Increasing this value raises the lowpass filter cutoff
point.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F012 Flng>Flng1
Morph:  Sweeps from flange 1 to flange 2
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to maintain spectrum.
Transform 2:  Provides volume and brightness control with velocity
and/or key position
Comments:  Key tracking enhances the depth of the flange. Try
adding velocity to Frequency Tracking for more “Fun”.
F013 0>Flng2
Morph:  Reveals flat to flange filter
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to maintain spectrum
Transform 2:  Adds volume, different flange
Comments:  Nice for introducing a subtle flange to a pure sound.
Velocity has a natural effect increasing flange depth, volume and
brightness.
=== PDF page 188 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 177
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F014 Flng>Flng3b
Morph:  Sweeps from flange 1 to 2
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to enhance flanging
Transform 2:  Increases depth of flange
Comments:  A gentle sweeper.
F015: Flng>Flng4
Morph:  Sweeps flange
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to enhance flanging.
Transform 2:  Reduces depth of flange effect with Morph offset,
otherwise, increases flange depth.
F016 Flng>Flng5
Morph:  Sweeps from flange 1 to 2
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to enhance flanging.
Transform 2:  Increases depth of flange, more bell-like.
Comments:  Morphing sweeps gently, but Transform 2 adds more
depth and introduces a bell-like quality to the flange.
F017 Flng>Flng6
Morph:  Sweeps from flange 1 to 2.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  Provides more brightness and flange.
F018 Flng>FlngT
Morph:  Sweeps between flat and flange.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  Provides more brightness and flange.
Comments:  A gentle-touch flanger. Low Transform 2 gives a soft
chorus on morphing. Higher Transform 2 gives exaggerated depth.
F019 Flng>FlngC
Morph:  Sweeps from open to closed response with all other axes at
0.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls brightness.
Transform 2:  Adds extra flange.
F020 CO>FlngT
Morph:  Sweeps from a reveal (almost flat) point to low pass peaks
Freq. Tracking:  Raises frequency of peaks.
Transform 2:  Increases depth of flange.
=== PDF page 189 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual178
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
DIPTHONGS
Implemented with parametric equalizer subsections, the resonances do
not have the traditional overall lowpass effect that a true vocal reso-
nance would have. Instead, they are placed at the same frequency as
the resonances would be found in a true vowel, but the response at
high frequencies is essentially flat to allow high frequencies of the
samples to get through the filter.
The Morph axis controls movement between vowels. Key tracking is
controlled by Frequency Tracking. Brightness and depth of effect is
controlled by Transform 2. In certain filters, brightness is controlled
by assigning velocity to Frequency Tracking. Each paravowel “A”
contains peaks at 800 1150, 2800, 3500 and 4950Hz. Each paravowel
“E” contains peaks at 400, 1600, 2700, 3300 and 4900Hz. Each “O”
has peaks at 450, 800, 2830, 3500 and 4950Hz. Each “U” has peaks at
325, 700, 2530, 3500 and 4950Hz.
F021 AEParLPVow
This paravowel has a low pass filter to provide additional roll off,
when desired. Otherwise, it behave as the other paravowels.
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels. Try setting Trans-
form 2 to 255 for additional brightness.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls volume, depth of effect.
F022 AEParaVowel
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels. Try setting Trans-
form 2 to 255.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls the amplitude of all of the resonances, with
000 providing the lowest resonance amplitude, and 255 providing
the highest resonance amplitude.
F023 AOLpParaVow
This paravowel has a low pass filter to provide additional roll off,
when desired. Otherwise, it behaves as the other paravowels.
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels. Try setting Trans-
form 2 to 255.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls the amplitude of all of the resonances.
F024 AOParaVowel
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls the amplitude of all of the resonances.
=== PDF page 190 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 179
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F025 AUParaVow.4
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls the amplitude of all of the resonances.
F026 UOParaVow.4
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls the amplitude of all of the resonances.
F027 SftEOVowel4
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls the amplitude of all of the resonances.
F028 SoftEOAE
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels.
Freq. Tracking:  Shifts all of the resonances up in frequency.
Transform 2:  Controls the amplitude of all of the resonances.
F029 Vocal Cube
Morph:  Sweeps frequencies.
Freq. Tracking:  Assign to velocity for brightness control.
Transform 2:  Tunes filter.
F030 C1-6 Harms4
Morph:  Sweeps between a notch at 190Hz to a series of closely
spaced peaks from 120Hz to 640Hz
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard. Try assigning velocity
to Frequency Tracking for brightness control.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F031 Voce.4
Morph:  Controls movement between “oo” and “ee”.
Freq. Tracking:  Designed for velocity control of brightness. (Trans-
forms to frequencies two octaves higher.)
Transform 2:  Not used.
F032 ChoralComb4
Morph:  Sweeps between different frequency notches tuned for
vocal formants.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard range.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 191 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual180
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F033 Bassutoi.4
Morph:  Controls movement between “yu” and “ee”.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard range and controls
brightness with velocity assigned.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F034 Be Ye.4
Designed to say “Be Ye”.
Morph:  Sweeps vocal formants.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard range and controls
brightness with velocity assigned.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F035 Ee-Yi.4
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels “e” and “i”.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard range and controls
brightness with velocity assigned.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F036 Ii-Yi.4
Morph:  Controls movement between vowels.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard range and controls
brightness with velocity assigned.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F037 Uhrrrah.4
Morph:  Roars like a lion.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard range and controls
brightness with velocity assigned.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F038 YeahYeah.4
See “What Yeah” preset.
Morph: Moves between “ee” and “ya” sounds.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard range and controls
brightness when assigned to velocity.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F039 Vow>Vow1
Morph:  Sweeps between “ah” and “oh”.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Provides volume and brightness control with velocity
and/or key position.
Comments:  Transform 2 increases volume and depth of vowel
effect.
=== PDF page 192 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 181
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F040 Vow>Vow2
Morph:  Sweeps between “ee” and “oh”.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  Provides volume and brightness control with velocity
and/or key position.
Comments:  Morphing sweeps between vowels- slight “E” effect.
F041 YahYahs.4
Morph:  Sweeps between “eeya” and “aa”.
Freq. Tracking:  Introduces frequencies two octaves higher for key
tracking and brightness control.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F042 YoYo.4
Morph:  Sweeps between “ee” and “oh” sounds.
Freq. Tracking:  Introduces frequencies two octaves higher for key
tracking and brightness control.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F043 VowelSpace
Dr. William Martens developed this filter cube, which allows any
vowel to be approximated with only two parameters.
Morph:  Sweeps the first formant of the vowel from 150Hz up to
850Hz.
Freq. Tracking:  Sweeps the second formant from 500Hz up to
2500Hz.
Transform 2:  Changes the vowel “stress.” Low stress means that all
of the vowel frequencies collapse to a relaxed “schwa” sound.
Maximum Transform produces the maximum excursion (stress)
for all of the vowel frequencies.
STANDARD
These filters are variations on traditional 2 and 4-pole filter models
F044 BrickWalLP.4
This filter features an extreme rolloff at the cutoff point, which
moves from 100Hz to 3000Hz. Use this filter to produce low-
resonance filter sweeps, or to selectively filter out high frequencies
in the source sound.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter depth and provides gentler roll-off
beginning ~3000Hz.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 193 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual182
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F045 BrickWal LP2
Morph:  Controls filter ‘Q’.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Use to control filter depth.
F046 MdQ 2PoleLP
A single pole of this filter is swept from low to high as the filter is
Morphed. This filter produces nice, not-too-resonant sweep effects.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Controls resonance.
F047 HiQ 2PoleLP
A more resonant version of filter 046, again with a single fre-
quency band being swept about according to Morph.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Controls resonance.
F048 MdQ 4PoleLP
Similar to filters 046 and 047, in this filter two of the poles (tuned
to the same frequency) are swept to create a steeper rolloff at the
cutoff point, re-creating the classic 4-pole lowpass filter effect. This
filter features medium resonance which can be accentuated via the
Transform 2 offset.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Controls resonance.
F049 HiQ 4PoleLP
Again, (as with filters 046-047), two poles tuned to the same
frequency are swept to create a steep rolloff at the filter cutoff
point. This filter features high ‘Q’, which can be controlled via
Transform 2.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Controls resonance.
F050 2poleLoQLP4
This is basically a 2-pole lowpass filter which can be swept from
60Hz to 19.5kHz. Modulating the Frequency Tracking parameter
upward will increase filter resonance. A good choice for emulating
certain kinds of analog filter effects.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls resonance.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 194 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 183
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F051 4 PoleLoQ.4
A resonant low-pass filter emulation. Morphing creates the famil-
iar filter sweep effect.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter resonance.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F052 4PoleMidQ.4
A 4-filter version of the classic 4-pole resonant filter found in most
analog synthesizers.
Morph:  Controls filter cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls resonance (“Q”).
Transform 2:  Not used.
F053 2p>4p 0
Morph:  Opens up the filter making it brighter.
Freq. Tracking:  This adds a small amount of resonance (Q) to the
filter.
Transform 2:  Changes from a 4-pole filter (-24dB/oct.) to a 2-pole
filter (-12dB/oct.).
Comments:  This All Pole filter is modeled on traditional lowpass
filter. It has a soft resonance boost.
F054 LowPassPlus
Morph:  Sweeps from octave peaks starting at 220Hz to
inharmonic, higher frequency peaks.
Freq. Tracking:  Keyboard tracking.
Transform 2:   Brightens the response.
F055 Low Past.4
Poles with fairly high ‘Q’ settings are grouped into the lower- to
upper-midrange. Sweeping along the Morph or Frequency Track-
ing axes can produce some rather vocal-sounding effects.
Morph:  Use to sweep the frequencies of the pole.
Freq. Tracking:  Use to tune the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F056 APass.4
Simple lowpass filter with gentle rolloff above 200Hz; morphs to
flat.
Morph:  Gentle lowpass to flat response.
Freq. Tracking:  Also moves the filter towards a flat response,
allowing you to control the depth of filtering
Transform 2:  Not used.
Comments:  A good choice when more subtle filtering is desired.
=== PDF page 195 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual184
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F057 HPSweep.4
A highly resonant high-pass filter which generally rolls off fre-
quencies steeply below ~2.5kHz.A  low Morph Offset will create a
relatively flat response (with a gentle cut to the lower frequencies),
so the most subtle filtering is achieved with Morph Offset set to
000, and Frequency Tracking set to 255.
Morph:  Positive values move the filter higher in frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Positive values move the filter toward a flatter
curve.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F058 HiSwept1.4
A highly resonant filter with ‘Q’ increasing as the Morph or Fre-
quency Tracking parameters are swept upward. Increase the value
for Frequency Tracking to accentuate this brightness and reso-
nance.
Morph & Freq. Tracking:  Control filter cutoff and resonance.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F059 HghsSwpt2.4
A more open-sounding version of filter 058. Raises both the filter
cutoff point and filter ‘Q’.
Morph & Freq. Tracking:  Raises both the filter cutoff point and
filter ‘Q’.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F060 HighAccent.4
The center frequencies remain constant throughout all permuta-
tions of this filter along the Morph and Frequency Tracking axes;
what changes are the ‘Q’ settings for the various poles and zeros.
This allows you to accentuate various resonances, (generally in the
upper frequency ranges), of the source sound by manipulating the
Morph Offset point and the Frequency Tracking parameter.
Morph:  Controls ‘Q’ of the various poles.
Freq. Tracking:  Higher values produce brighter, thinner sounds.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F061 HiPassSweep.4
A high-pass filter with the cutoff point moving from about 160Hz
to upwards of 2.5kHz (with a sizable gain in resonance) as the
filter is morphed upward.
Morph:  Higher settings increase cutoff frequency and ‘Q’.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter depth.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 196 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 185
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F062 Deep Combs
This filter can provide a tremendous variety of comb-filtering and
filter sweep effects. Higher frequencies are sharply attenuated with
Frequency Tracking and Transform 2 set to low values, so be sure
at least one of these is either set in the mid- to high-range, or that
a modulator is used to offset.
Morph:  Positive modulation moves frequency notches towards
lower values.
Freq. Tracking:  Positive modulation moves frequency notches
towards lower values.
Transform 2:  Positive modulation moves frequency notches
towards lower values.
F063 One Peak
Morph:  Try setting Transform 2 to 255 for increased brightness
over morph range. Sweeps from a slight peak at 220Hz and roll-off
after 650Hz to a series of even peaks at 220,440, 880Hz, and a
smaller odd series at 330, 555 and 770Hz.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter to keyboard.
Transform 2:  Increases the effect of Morph and provides velocity
sensing.
F064 More Peaks
Morph:  Try setting Transform 2 to 255. Moves from a low cut-off
flat frame to a series of peaks at 220, 440, 880, 330, 1000 and
2000Hz.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Intensifies effect and controls volume.
F065 Rev Peaks
Morph:  Try setting Transform 2 to 255. Moves from flat with a
low-frequency cut-off to a series of peaks at 220, 440, 660, 880,
1100 and 1320.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks keyboard with notches three octaves higher.
Transform 2:  Contains higher gain peaks at same frequencies as
Morph axis for volume control and deeper effect.
F066 Notcher 2.4
Frames 1 and 3 contain multiple, unevenly spaced notches and
peaks, while frames 2 and 4 are essentially flat. Modulating up-
ward along the Morph axis, pushes the filter towards flat. Modu-
lating Frequency Tracking upwards tends to give the source
material a bit rounder, more ‘open’ sound.
Morph:  Sweeping over a narrow range with a quick LFO produces
some nice rotating speaker effects.
Freq. Tracking:  Can be used to tune the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 197 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual186
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F067 Ntches2Oct4
This filter is composed of a series of notches, tuned in octaves.
Morph & Freq. Tracking:  Moves notches lower in frequency.
Transform 2:  Not used.
 Comments:  Maximum shift is two octaves along either axis, for a
combined total of four octaves if both axes are modulated.
F068 Odd>+
Morph:  Changes from odd to even harmonics.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to maintain spectrum.
Transform 2:  Provides volume and brightness control.
Comments:  Hints at odd harmonics which are then changed into a
different shape depending on the position of Transform 2.
(Transform 2 mostly respects natural changes in brightness,
however.)
F069 VarSlope.4
A low-pass filter in which the rolloff above the cutoff point
(400Hz) becomes steeper as the value for Morph Offset is
increased.
Morph:  Changes the slope of the rolloff.
Freq. Tracking:  Moves the filter toward flat response.
Transform 2:  Not used.
Comments:  A good choice when more subtle filtering is desired.
EQUALIZATION FILTERS
Most of these filters are variations of traditional parametric EQ filters.
F070 BassEQ 1.4
Morph:  Contains deep notch at 196Hz, morphing to a slight
bump at 132Hz and a dip at 2600Hz.
Freq. Tracking:  Frequency Tracking opens filter completely at
maximum offset.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F071 B BOOST.4
Morph:  Boosts frequencies around 60Hz, sweeping to open re-
sponse.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides gentle rise at 320Hz and 5kHz.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F072 BssBOOST2.4
Morph:  Boosts frequencies around 60Hz, sweeping to open re-
sponse.
Freq. Tracking:  Introduces a dip at 320Hz and a peak at 2059Hz.
With axes offset, a bump at 60Hz and 1200Hz is introduced.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 198 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 187
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F073 BassDrumEQ
Morph:  Adds low end boost.
Freq. Tracking:  Tends to smooth out the filter.
Transform 2:  This adds high end at the expense of low end.
Comments:  This is an EQ filter designed for bass drums, based on a
low pass EQ filter. The transforms tailor to different types of bass
drums.
F074 Snare LPEQ2
Morph:  Controls brightness.
Freq. Tracking:  This moves the mid range bump down a bit.
Transform 2:  This will smooth the boost (widens the “Q”).
Comments:  This is an EQ filter designed for snares, based on a low
pass EQ filter. There is a strong boost in the 320Hz to 640Hz range
and some boost on the low end to give it some punch. The trans-
forms tailor to different types of snares.
F075 HiHatLPEQ
Morph:  Controls brightness.
Freq. Tracking:  Tends to make the EQ more complex.
Transform 2:  Tends to modify the low end.
Comments:  This is an EQ filter designed for hi hats, based on a low
pass EQ filter. There is a strong boost in the 5kHz to 18kHz range
and some cut on the low end. The transforms tailor to different
types of hi-hats.
COMPLEX FILTERS
Many of these filters have never existed for musical applications
before!
F076 HP LP PZ
Morph:  Sets how open or closed the filter is.
Freq. Tracking:  Sets the transition from high pass to low pass.
Transform 2:  This sets the sharpness of the cut off.
Comments:  This Pole/ Zero filter models both low pass and high
pass filters.
F077 PZ Notch
Morph:  Sets the notch's center frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  This deepens the notch (more cut).
Transform 2:  This makes the notch wider (widens the “Q”).
Comments:  This Pole/ Zero filter is a notch that ranges from 80Hz
to 10kHz.
=== PDF page 199 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual188
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F078 Band-aid
Morph:  Sets the amount of cut on the high and low frequencies.
Freq. Tracking:  This widens the band.
Transform 2:  This softens the amount of cut on the high end.
Comments:  This Pole/ Zero filter is a band pass that cuts both the
high and low end of the sample.
F079 LowQHiQ
Morph: Controls brightness.
Freq. Tracking:  Changes from a 4-pole filter (-24dB/oct.) to a 2-
pole filter (-12dB/oct.)
Transform 2:  This adds resonance (“Q”) to the filter.
Comments:  This All Pole filter is modeled on traditional low pass
filter types. It can emulate most familiar analog sounds.
F080 Wah4Vib.4
Morph:  Sweeps from slight rise above 1200Hz to a peak at 590Hz
with roll-off after. Sounds more mellow and rounded as offset is
increased.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F081 WaWa
Multiple resonant peaks flatten, then invert to become notches as
the value for Morph Offset or Frequency Tracking is increased.
Increasing the value for Transform 2 can have the effect of sweep-
ing the peaks lower in frequency, inverting the peaks, or both,
depending on the settings for Morph Offset and Frequency Track-
ing.
Morph & Freq. Tracking:  Controls polarity of filter gain.
Transform 2:  Tunes filter and controls polarity of gain.
F082 BrassRez.4
Compelling trumpet mute effect.
Morph:  Try assigning Control A or Velocity to Morph as a note-on
controller. Increasing Morph Offset reveals less muted, more open
response. Reverse filter for opposite response.
Freq. Tracking:  Modulates between a similarly shaped second set of
resonances for additional Note-on control.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F083 Clr>Oboe
Morph:  Sweeps from Clarinet to Oboe
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  Provides volume and brightness control with velocity
and/or key position.
Comments:  Strong morphing effect with this filter. Transform 2
takes care of velocity expressivity.
=== PDF page 200 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 189
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F084 0>Muter
Morph:  Introduces “Mute”.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  Selects “Mute” variety.
F085 PZ Syn Horn
Morph:  Controls brightness.
Freq. Tracking:  This moves the harmonic modifiers higher in
frequency.
Transform 2:  This makes a modest change in brightness (fine
tuning).
Comments:  This filter models the harmonic content of a synth
horn, thus will lend a synth horn sound to other samples.
F086 HP Brass
Generally, each frame in this filter cube provides either a steep
rolloff of low frequencies or a sharp boost of high frequencies,
with one axis arriving at flat response. Note that with Transform 2
set to 255, the polarity of the sweep along the Morph axis is
reversed. This filter can be a good choice when you need a sharp
accentuation of high-frequency material.
Morph:  Sweeps the highpass filter, with direction dependent on
setting of Transform 2.
Freq. Tracking:  Higher values produce thinner, brighter sounds.
Transform 2:  Sweeps the highpass filter, with direction dependent
on setting of Morph Offset.
F087 BrassyBlast
This filter provides several responses similar to that of a lowpass
filter, but with the addition of a gentle bump in the midrange to
upper-midrange.
Morph:  Use to sweep the filter.
Freq. Tracking:  Adds a resonant bump at about 200Hz, which
flattens out as the value is moved upward.
Transform 2: Works similarly to Frequency Tracking, but adds a
gentle bump at about 8kHz as the offset is increased.
Comments:  A very smooth-sounding filter, great for brass-type
filter sweep effects.
F088 BrassSwell
Similar to a lowpass filter, but multiple resonant peaks give this
one a bit of a vocal, phase-shifter-like quality.
Morph:  Use to sweep the filter.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Higher values add midrange “beef” and resonance.
=== PDF page 201 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual190
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F089 BrsSwell2.4
An emulation of a lowpass filter with low resonance designed for
brass-type filter sweeps.
Morph: Moves the cutoff frequency higher, and adds a gentle
bump in the upper-midrange.
Freq. Tracking:  Adds a bit of resonance at the cutoff point, which
becomes flatter as the filter is morphed upward.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F090 LoVelTrum
A series of tightly spaced peaks is swept upward by each of the
filter transforms, with the brightest sounds obtained at maximum
settings for Morph Offset, Frequency Tracking, and Transform 2.
In addition, Transform 2 increases the resonance.
Morph and Freq. Tracking:  Sweeps the peaks.
Transform 2:  Tunes the peaks and increases resonance.
F091 Chiffin.4
Morph:  Sweeps between low frequency notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Allows the notches to track the keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
Comments:  Use with noise to create a chiff sound on wind
instruments.
F092 ShakuFilter
Morph:  Sweeps between peaks at 400Hz, 1600Hz, 2700Hz and
3150Hz with roll-off after 30kHz to a mostly flat response with a
slight bump at 1900Hz.
Freq. Tracking:  Keyboard tracking.
Transform 2:  Controls tone and depth.
F093 Cym
Morph:  Sweeps from peaks at 100Hz, 300Hz, 400Hz, 600Hz,
900Hz and 1500Hz to peaks at 200Hz, 600Hz, 800Hz, etc.
Freq. Tracking:  Keyboard tracking.
Transform 2:  Deepens the effect.
Comments:  Designed to make interesting cymbal sounds. Both
Morph and Frequency Tracking manipulate frequency sweeps.
F094 VelMarim
Morph:  Sweeps frequencies of small, closely-spaced peaks.
Freq. Tracking:  Keyboard tracking.
Transform 2:  Deepens the effect.
Comments:  Designed to make dynamic marimba sounds using
mallet and plate sounds.
=== PDF page 202 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 191
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F095 EZ Vibez.4
Like 098-“Easy Rhodes”, this is essentially a 2-pole low-pass filter,
sweeping from a gentle roll-off at 65Hz to reveal a wide open
response.
Morph:  Sweeps from lowpass to wide open response.
Freq. Tracking:  Keyboard tracking.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F096 Piano 01
Designed to make possible a set of Piano presets that sound like
they were recorded with the sustain pedal down.
F097 PianoFltr4
This filter functions much like a lowpass filter with a low ‘Q’
setting. Cutoff frequency is controlled along the Morph axis.
Increasing the value for Frequency Tracking increases overall
brightness. Although this filter is designed to work well for adding
expressiveness to piano-type sounds, it can also be useful in many
instances when a filter with a gentle slope is required.
Morph:  Controls cutoff frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls cutoff frequency and brightness.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F098 EZ Rhodez4
A lowpass filter, with cutoff frequency ranging from about 200Hz
to about 5kHz along the Morph axis.
Morph:  Sets cutoff frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter depth.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F099 MoogVocodr4
Designed to simulate the classic vocoder filter response. Morph
sweeps the frequencies. Frequency Tracking produces a more nasal
and enclosed effect.
Morph:  Sweeps frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Increases resonance.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F100 MoogVocSwp
Similar to “MoogVocodr4”, but brighter. Can create variety of
interesting responses by altering offsets of each axis, such as
sweeping Morph with Frequency Tracking at maximum.
Morph:  Sweeps frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Increases resonance.
Transform 2:  Changes the effect of the Morph parameter.
=== PDF page 203 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual192
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F101 StrngThing4
A series of widely spaced notches produces this filter, which can
sound somewhat like a phase shifter when Morphed - especially if
the value for Frequency Tracking is set fairly high. With Morph
Offset and Frequency Tracking set high, the curve is essentially
flat, with a gentle bump approaching 20kHz, so this filter might
be a good choice for adding a subtle sparkle to some sounds.
Morph:  Controls cutoff frequency and depth of notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F102 StrSweep.4
Set Frequency Tracking between the ranges of 200 and 255, and
gently modulate the Morph Offset parameter in its upper ranges
for an effect that will accentuate bowing sounds in string pro-
grams.
Morph:  Positive modulation increases filter center frequencies and
resonance.
Freq. Tracking:  Positive modulation decreases resonance, increases
brightness slightly.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F103 BassXpress
This filter provides increased bass, and a sharp notch.
Morph:  Controls the depth of the notch.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the notch.
Transform 2:  Controls the lowpass filter cutoff frequency.
F104 Qbase.4
Morph:  Sweeps from a bright nasal response to accentuated low-
frequency boost.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F105 AcGtrRs.4
This filter is designed to emulate some of the resonant characteris-
tics of an acoustic guitar body. With Morph Offset and Frequency
Tracking set to 000, the body is extremely resonant, as if a large
acoustic guitar were close-miked near the sound hole. Vary the
value for Morph Offset to vary the ‘mic position’. Route velocity
to Freq. Tracking for controlling brightness and ‘pick position’.
Morph:  Controls filter formant notch depth and position.
Freq. Tracking:  Frequency Tracking.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 204 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 193
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F106 Tube Sust.4
Use this filter with broad-band waves to produce sounds character-
istic of distorted guitars. The fullest sounds are achieved with
Morph Offset set to 255, and Frequency Tracking set to 000
Morph:  Increasing this increases bass and midrange.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls the lower-midrange.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F107 GtrSkwk
Morph:  Plays the squeak.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Makes brighter, adds more volume and squeak.
Comments:  Higher Transform 2 allows morphing to “string
squeak”. Best used with Aux. Env or Function Generator to control
this. Routing Velocity to Transform 2 will reduce squeak on low
velocities.
F108 GuitXpress
Increasing the Morph Offset value places a notch in the frequency
spectrum, the tuning of which can be controlled via the Fre-
quency Tracking and Transform 2 parameters. In addition, in-
creasing the value for Frequency Tracking and/or Transform 2
raises the cutoff point of the lowpass filter. This filter can be used
to add a measure of expressiveness, particularly to acoustic instru-
ment simulations. Try using velocity to control Transform 2 and
key position to Frequency Tracking. For an additional measure of
control, assign Control A (the mod wheel) to control Morph in
the Note-on Control section.
Morph:  Increases the depth of the filter notch.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the notch and controls filter cutoff point.
Transform 2:  Tunes the notch and controls filter cutoff point.
F109 FG MajTrans4
This filter features a series of peaks tuned to the intervals found in
a major triad. Modulating the Morph Offset from 000 to 255
moves the ‘chord’ from first to second inversion; the Frequency
Tracking parameter can be used to tune the chord over a range of
several octaves. The effect is perhaps easiest to hear applied to one
of the noise waves. It also works well with the RecrdScrch waves.
Morph:  Moves the ‘chord’ of resonant peaks from first to second
inversion.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the chord.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 205 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual194
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F110 Tam
Morph:  Sweeps frequencies from low to high. Try routing velocity
or mod wheel to Morph with offset at 255.
Freq. Tracking:  Designed for velocity control of volume & bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and depth.
Comments:  Designed to make interesting, dynamic tambourine
sounds.
F111 HOTwell.4
Morph:  Sweeps frequency range.
Freq. Tracking:  Determines degree of frequencies accentuated.
Transform 2:  Not used.
Comments:  Works well with bell-like sounds.
F112 Bell.Waha
Morph:  Sweeps between flat and bell.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  More dissonance and effect.
Comments:  Morphing can pull bell-like sounds out of any sample.
Transform 2 adds more dissonance. This is best used with
BellWahb which has a similar action but uses different dissonant
partials.
113 Belwahb
Morph:  Sweeps between flat and bell.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  Controls dissonance and depth of effect.
Comments:  See BellWaha
F114 0>Bell-
Morph:  Sweeps from flat to dissonance.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix dissonant partials.
Transform 2:  Increases bell-like effect, makes brighter, louder.
Comments:  To be used in conjunction with 0>Bell+. Morphing
sweeps partials downwards just away from harmonic values caus-
ing bell-like effects.
F115 0>Bell+
Morph:  Sweeps from flat to dissonance.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix dissonant partials.
Transform 2:  Increases bell-like effect, makes the sound brighter
and louder.
Comments:  To be used in conjunction with 0>Bell-. Morphing
sweeps partials to a different dissonance than with 0>Bell-.
=== PDF page 206 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 195
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F116 Bel>Crs>Bel
Morph:  Sweeps from flat to dissonance.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix dissonant partials.
Transform 2:  Increases bell-like effect. Makes the sound brighter
and louder.
Comments:  Low velocities on Transform 2 reveals a hint of bells
when Morphing. Higher Transform 2 values create a more bell-like
and dissonant sound.
F117 Chrs>Flng1
Morph:  Sweeps to a flange effect.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to enhance flange effect.
Transform 2:  Makes brighter, increases volume.
Comments:  Degree of flanging effect depends on velocity.
F118 Chrs>Flng2
Morph:  Sweeps to a flange effect.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to enhance flange effect.
Transform 2:  Makes brighter, adds volume.
Comments:  Velocity controls degree of flange effect.
F119 Ev/OdNtch.4
Morph:  Sweeps from even notches at 200, 400, 800Hz, etc with an
overall low frequency cut-off to notches at 300, 600, 1200,
2400Hz, etc. effecting a warm to bright transition.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F120 Odd/EvnNtch
Morph:  Provides subtle modulation between odd octave intervals
starting at 75Hz and even octave intervals starting at 50Hz.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls brightness.
Transform 2:  Deepens the effect and adds volume.
F121 NotchPkSwp4
Morph:  Sweeps from nasal to bright; vowel shifts from ‘oh’ to ‘ee’.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls brightness and tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F122 1.5/3KNBPR4
Morph:  Morphs from thin and high to richer and deeper to a yet a
different timbre resonance; adds energy.
Freq. Tracking:  Frequency Tracking thickens the spectral plot.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 207 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual196
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F123 Swingshift
Morph: Try setting Transform 2 to 255 for brighter morph. Modu-
lates from low-frequency cut-off to series of peaks at 349Hz,
494Hz, 698Hz, 988Hz etc.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks filter with keyboard.
Transform 2:  Adds depth, volume.
F124 500up.4
Poles and zeros alternate, spaced at 500Hz intervals. Increasing
Morph Offset boosts the peaks slightly, and greatly deepens the
notches, producing an effect similar to band-pass filtering. This
effect is further accentuated by increasing the Frequency Tracking
value, as well as tuning the entire filter higher.
Morph:  Increases depth of notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F125 C1Harmonic5oct.8R
Morph:  Try setting Transform 2 to maximum. Controls resonance.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls resonance.
Transform 2:  Tunes the filter.
F126 Odd>Even
Morph:  Changes from odds to even harmonics.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to maintain spectrum.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Odd harmonics are replaced by evens. Can give an
 impression a raising one octave.
F127 0>Shp1
Morph:  Changes from flat to shape.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to maintain spectrum.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Imposes a vowel like shape on a pure sound. (Can be
useful for morphing in and out using two samples.)
F128 0>Shp2
Morph:  Changes from flat to shape.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to maintain spectrum.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  More vowel like changes than 0>Shape1.
=== PDF page 208 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 197
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F129 0>Shp3
Morph:  Sweeps to shape.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Morphing imposes a shape on the sound. Low velocity
for mellow, high for bright.
F130 Shp>Shp1
Starts with peaks every half octave from 66Hz and morphs to
peaks every octave beginning at 66Hz Effect is “ee” to “u” with
Frequency Tracking fully offset. Transform 2 reveals a completely
flat response with all axes offset.
F131 Lpeq Vel
Morph:  Moves between different “softs” & “brights”.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to maintain spectrum.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Position of the Morph determines the nature of the
softness and brightness.
F132 CleanSweep4
A number of lowpass, highpass and bandpass type effects can be
produced using this filter. It works particularly well on solo brass
waves to produce a variety of mute effects.
Morph:  Effects range from lowpass with low ‘Q’ to highpass with
high ‘Q’.
Freq. Tracking:  Increase for thinner, brighter and more resonant
sounds.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F133 PowerSweeps
Alternating resonant peaks and notches, spaced at approximately
half-octave intervals can be used to produce a number of flanging
and vocal effects. The direction of Morph depends on the Freq.
Tracking setting.
Morph:  Modulating this sweeps the peaks/notches up and/or
down.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter; determines polarity of Morph.
Transform 2:  Can also be used to tune the filter.
=== PDF page 209 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual198
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F134 TSweep.4
A grouping of inharmonically related peaks gives this filter some-
thing of a metallic quality, although it can also produce voice-like
sounds. Increasing Morph Offset increases overall filter resonance
and raises the cutoff point of the lowpass filter. Frequency Track-
ing can be used to tune the filter.
Morph: Controls ‘Q’; controls lowpass cutoff.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F135 SweepHiQ1.4
Morph:  Sweeps from peaks at 150Hz, 430Hz, 870Hz , 1500Hz,
3000Hz and 7000Hz to peaks an octave higher.
Freq. Tracking:  Introduces high Q peaks at 1.2kHz and 3.4kHz to
narrowly spaced peaks at 1500Hz to 15kHz.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F136 V>FcQuad.4
Designed for velocity to control filter cut-off. Each frame has an
octave higher cut-off than the one before it.
Morph:  Moves from a bump at 320Hz then a brickwall cut-off up
an octave.
Freq. Tracking:  Tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F137 Nexus.4
Morph:  Moves from a brickwall low pass to higher frequency,
relaxed slope response.
Freq. Tracking:  Frequency Tracking at maximum inverts effect of
morph.
Transform 2:  Not used.
Comments:  Designed for Frequency Tracking to control brightness
with velocity.
F138 Krators.4
Morph:  Provides resonant peaks at low-frequencies, morphing
from lower to higher frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls brightness.
Transform 2:  Not used.
Comments:  Designed to control brightness by assigning Velocity
to Frequency Tracking.
••• A “brickwall” filter is one
with an extremely steep
slope.
=== PDF page 210 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 199
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F139 Harmonix.4
Morph:  Morphs between complex responses sweeping to mid
frequency resonances while leaving edges untouched.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls brightness and tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F140 GreenWorld4
Morph:  A mellow low-frequency sweeper designed for piano
applications.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls brightness and tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F141 Comb/Swap.4
Morph:  Controls a series of notches moving from 160Hz to 10kHz.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls brightness and tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F142 Comb/HP.4
Morph:  Sweeps between a series of low frequency notches to a
high pass response.
Freq. Tracking:  Keyboard Tracking and brightness control.
Transform 2:  Not used.
Comments:  Control the brightness by assigning Velocity to Fre-
quency Tracking.
F143 Swirly
Morph:  Moves from series of notches to fewer notches.
Freq. Tracking: Tracks keyboard.
Transform 2:  Alters timbre of effect and adds dynamics.
Comments:  Try a Transform 2 setting of 255 for a brighter Morph.
F144 Cavatate.4
Emphasizes frequencies from 160Hz to 2kHz.
Morph:  Morphs to a modified high pass response.
Freq. Tracking:  Brightness control .
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 211 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual200
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F145 GentleRZ4
A series of unevenly spaced resonant peaks converge to a single
peak as Morph Offset is increased. The Frequency Tracking offset
provides a somewhat muted sound (with several gentle bumps in
the mid-frequency range), moving toward a flat response. Sweep-
ing this filter produces some very smooth wa-wa effects. Using this
filter with the trumpet waves can produce sounds suggestive of
French Horns.
Morph:  Modulating this sweeps filter peaks.
Freq. Tracking:  Use this to control filter depth and cutoff.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F146 Bendup/Swap
This complex filter features several series of tuned resonant peaks
and notches which can seem to bend up or down in pitch depend-
ing on the settings for the various Morph, Frequency Tracking,
and
Transform 2 parameters.
Morph:  Use to tune the filter.
Freq. Tracking:  Low values make upward filter sweeps appear to
bend pitch up. High values make pitch bend appear to go down.
Transform 2:  Higher values make the filter sound more open.
F147 Bendup
This is similar to filter number 146, except that the bend is always
in an upward direction (if the Morph axis is swept in a positive
direction). Frequency Tracking can be used to tune the filter over a
nearly 2-octave range. Transform 2 is used to set the cutoff point
of the lowpass filter; higher values raise the cutoff point.
Morph:  Sweeps harmonic peaks.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Increase for a brighter effect.
F148 SKWEEZIT
This filter features a complex series of peaks and notches. Varying
the Morph parameter varies the ‘Q’ settings for most of the peaks
and notches, while sweeping the frequency and Q of the first pole.
Morph:  Sweeps one of the resonant peaks and varies ‘Q’.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Controls resonance.
=== PDF page 212 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 201
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F149 Lo/High4
A scattering of poles and zeros with fairly high Q settings produces
this very resonant filter. Sweeping the Morph axis produces quite
pronounced wa-wa effects in which multiple resonances are
clearly audible. Morph Offset and Frequency Tracking can be used
to tune the filter, although with Morph Offset set to 255, the filter
is essentially flat.
Morph:  Positive values increase pole/zero frequencies and decrease
‘Q’, opening the filter entirely.
Freq. Tracking:  Similar to the Morph axis, but a bit higher in pitch.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F150 SbtleMvmnt4
Morphing this filter to reverse the polarity of a series of more-or-
less evenly spaced peaks and notches produces an effect more
subdued than some types of filter sweeps. Using velocity or a mod
wheel (assigned through the Note-on Control section) to control
the Morph parameter can be useful when developing responsive
plucked-string instrument sounds, such as guitar.
Morph:  Controls polarity of poles.
Freq. Tracking: Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F151 Buzzy Pad.4
This filter produces a bump at 65Hz and a rolloff above 250Hz at
low Morph values. Increasing the Morph value pushes the bump
up to about 2kHz, and the cutoff of the lowpass filter up to 20kHz.
Increasing the value of Frequency Tracking sends the bump higher
yet — up to about 8400Hz at maximum offset. The effect of
sweeping the Morph axis is similar to that of a classic 2-pole
lowpass filter with medium resonance.
Morph:  Tunes the filter.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F152 Bw5kHz+6.4
Lowpass cutoff is set to 400Hz with “0” Morph Offset. In addition,
there is a 6 dB bump at 5kHz. The bandwidth of this “bump” is
controlled by the Morph parameter. Sweeping the Morph Offset
upwards moves the bandwidth setting from very narrow to very
wide. Frequency Tracking moves the cutoff frequency of the
lowpass filter up to a maximum of 20kHz. The range of effects
available is from fairly dramatic to quite subtle.
Morph:  Controls filter bandwidth.
Freq. Tracking:  Controls filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 213 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual202
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F153 Bw65Hz/2k.4
This filter is similar to filter 152, but in addition to sweeping the
bandwidth of a single peak along the Morph and Frequency
Tracking axes, the peak itself is swept. The range of the frequency
sweep is one octave along either axis, although much greater
ranges of change are achieved when both the Morph and Fre-
quency Tracking axes are combined. Effects range from gentle,
analog-style filter sweeps (with the Frequency Tracking parameter
set low), to more ‘digital’ sounding effects in which high-pitched,
whistling harmonics are produced.
Morph:  Controls bandwidth and frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F154 Bb80Hzbw1.4
With a Morph Offset value of “0”, the lowpass filter cutoff is set at
400Hz, and there is a wide-band bump at 80Hz. Morphing the
filter increases the gain of this bump from 6 dB to 24 dB. Fre-
quency Tracking increases the cutoff to 19.5kHz, and decreases the
bandwidth of the 80Hz bump.
Morph:  Controls bandwidth.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F155 HighsTwist4
The frequencies of the poles and zeros in this filter remain con-
stant as Morph or Freq. Tracking are modulated, but the ‘Q’ values
are modulated in a variety of ways. The filter is closest to flat (with
some emphasis in the high frequency range and a small bump at
about 200Hz) when Morph Offset and Frequency Tracking are
both set to 000. Modulating either or both of these parameters
upward emphasizes more of the highs, with increased values for
Frequency Tracking, rolling off the lows as well.
Morph:  Controls filter ‘Q’.
Freq. Tracking:  Modulate upward for thinner, brighter sounds.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F156 Cubix
Morphing this filter produces a lowpass filter sweep effect, while
pushing the Frequency Tracking parameter in a positive direction
moves the filter towards a more flat response, with a bit of subtle
emphasis in the higher frequencies.
Morph:  Produces low-pass filter effects.
Freq. Tracking:  Use to control key tracking or to set overall filter
depth.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness.
=== PDF page 214 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 203
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F157 Intervallc4
This filter is similar to the ‘Bendup/Swap’ filter, but here the effect
is even more pronounced. With Frequency Tracking set to 000,
pushing the Morph Offset higher produces a downward sweep of a
series of very resonant harmonics. Set Frequency Tracking to 255,
however, and the sweep reverses. Other effects can be achieved by
experimenting with the interaction between these two parameters.
Because of its metallic overtones, this filter can make a good
choice for simulating certain percussion instruments, such as steel
drums and kalimbas.
Morph:  Causes a downward sweep of harmonic intervals.
Freq. Tracking:  Reverses Morph sweep.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F158 EvenCuts4
This filter produces a series of notches in the frequency spectrum
(based on the even harmonic series), which turn into small bumps
when morphed.
Morph:  Controls the depth of the notches/height of the bumps.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the notches/bumps.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F159 OddCuts.4
This filter produces a series of notches in the frequency spectrum
(based on the odd harmonic series), which turn into small bumps
when morphed.
Morph:  Controls the depth of the notches/height of the bumps.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the notches/bumps.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F160 PWMtrans.4
This filter produces a series of harmonically related notches,
which become peaks as the filter is morphed upward — the effect
can be similar to pulse width modulation, depending on the
source material. As Frequency Tracking is moved upward, the
peaks/notches move toward the high end of the frequency range,
and ‘Q’ is increased, producing more resonant sounds.
Morph:  Controls depth of the peaks/notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter and controls ‘Q’ amount.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F161 HiEndQ.4
This filter behaves much like a resonant low-pass filter.
Morph:  Sweep this for low-pass filter effects.
Freq. Tracking:  Sets the initial cutoff point of the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 215 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual204
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
F162 BroadRes.4
Sweeping filter for resonant effects. Can be used for a “waterdrop”
effect on percussion.
Morph:  Sweeps to a series of peaks and notches. Notches: 80Hz,
160Hz, 320Hz. Peaks: 2kHz, 6kHz, 10kHz.
Freq. Tracking:  Turns peaks into notches.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F163 RubberHose4
This filter introduces a series of peaks spaced at octave intervals, in
the range of 95Hz to 1.5kHz, and a single notch at 47Hz. Increas-
ing the Morph Offset further raises the peaks and lowers the
notch.
Morph:  Use to control the depth of the peaks/notch.
Freq. Tracking:  Higher values attenuate the effect of the filter.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F164 HeeghCube
This filter produces a very subtle series of peaks above 4kHz.
Morphing increases the gain and bandwidth of the peaks, slightly,
and Frequency Tracking can be used to subtly raise the frequency
of the peaks. Increasing the value for Transform 2 increases the
gain of the peaks without affecting bandwidth.
Morph:  Controls gain and bandwidth of peaks.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Controls gain of peaks.
F165 NoizCube
This filter introduces some subtle peaks into the high frequency
range, along with a single peak which can be swept.
Morph:  Sweeps a single frequency.
Freq. Tracking:  Determines range of sweep.
Transform 2:  Tunes the sweep, bandwidth, and ‘Q’.
F166 VelctyTilt
This filter can function as a sweepable, subtle low-pass filter.
Morph & Freq. Tracking:  Control filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Controls filter resonance.
F167 SynthWow4
An emulation of a resonant low-pass filter. Both Morph Offset and
Frequency Tracking control cutoff frequency; the brightest sounds
are obtained with both these parameters set to 255.
Morph & Freq. Tracking:  Control filter cutoff.
Transform 2:  Not used.
=== PDF page 216 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 205
F168 CntrySweep4
Multiple peaks are swept in a variety of directions, imparting a
phase-shifter-like, almost vocal quality when this filter is
morphed.
Morph:  Set this higher to move widely spaced peaks closer to-
gether.
Freq. Tracking:  Set this higher to move low-frequency peaks
towards the higher ranges.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F169 Diffuser4
Morphing this filter upward sweeps a resonant peak up in fre-
quency and increases low frequency content. The Frequency
Tracking parameter can be used to tune the peak.
Morph:  Use to tune the resonant peak and control low-frequency
content.
Freq. Tracking:  Use to ‘tune’ the resonant peak and control low-
frequency content.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F170 MdlySweep4
Morphing this filter upward sweeps several resonant peaks up in
frequency. The Frequency Tracking parameter can be used to tune
the peaks.
Morph & Freq. Tracking:  Tune the resonant peaks.
Transform 2:  Not used.
F171 StrongShimr
This filter produces several deep notches in the frequency spec-
trum, which can be tuned or swept according to the settings and
modulators for the Morph Offset, Frequency Tracking, and Trans-
form 2 parameters.
Morph:  Raising this value lowers the frequency of the notches,
producing thinner sounds.
Freq. Tracking:  Raising this value lowers the frequency of the
notches, producing thinner sounds.
Transform 2:  Raising this value raises the frequency of the
notches, producing fatter sounds.
F172 Acc.Vel-1
Morph:  Fixes soft “Start-point”.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Velocity cube. Use Morph to establish soft start point.
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
=== PDF page 217 ===
Morpheus Operation Manual206
F173 Acc.Vel-2
Variation of “Acc.Vel-1”, except somewhat brighter on bottom
and mellower on top.
F174 Vel2-Wind
Morph:  Fixes soft “Start-point”.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Velocity cube. Use morph to establish soft start point.
Good for wind instruments as more morph gives a “hollower” soft
sound.
F175 Harmo
Morph:  Changes from “peaky” lowpass response to smooth
lowpass.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Controls volume, brightness and dissonance.
Comments:  Cube construction - Use the Aux. Envelope to provide
attack transient which then fades off to rear frames.
F176 Start>EndA
Morph:  Complex peak at 80Hz to a very gentle lowpass response.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard bright-
ness.
Transform 2:  Brighter, more volume, more harmonics.
Comments:  Cube construction - Use the Aux. Envelope to provide
attack transient which then fades off to rear frames. Softer version
than “HarmoEP”. Volume changes for sensitivity are maintained
in the cube.
F177 Start>EndB
Morph:  Flat response to gentle lowpass.
Freq. Tracking:  Key tracking to balance keyboard brightness.
Transform 2:  Controls volume, brightness and harmonic content.
Comments:  Same model as Start>EndA but more bright and disso-
nant.
F178 MovingPick1
Morph:  Tight<>Hollow
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to balance keyboard brightness.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Uses Morph to simulate acoustic versus electric type
response to velocity: plucking closer or further from the bridge of
a guitar for example.
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS
=== PDF page 218 ===
Chapter 11: Reference Section 207
F179 MovingPick2
A variation on “MovingPick1” to simulate different pick positions,
for example. Morph moves closer to neck, further from bridge.
F180 Mph+Trns1
Morph:  Makes vowel like changes.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to enhance vowel.
Transform 2:  Controls vowels, brightness, volume.
Comments:  Uses Morph to sweep from one vowel to another.
Transform 2 takes care of velocity expression.
F181 0>Odds
Morph:  Sweeps from flat to odds only.
Freq. Tracking:  Provides key tracking to fix partials.
Transform 2:  Controls brightness and volume.
Comments:  Strong odds only spectrum with morphing. Transform
2 takes care of brightness.
F182 Comb Voices
Center frequencies of the poles and zeros in this filter can move in
opposite directions as the filter is modulated along any of its axes,
producing an amazing variety of possible curves. Sweeping the
Morph axis produces some lovely phase-shifter/flanger-type
effects, especially with the value for Transform 2 set fairly high.
Morph:  Use this to animate the comb-filtering effect.
Freq. Tracking:  Generally, this can be used to tune the filter.
Transform 2:  Moves the filter toward more open sounds.
F183 Odd-Ev Hrm
A series of peaks and notches based on the odd and even har-
monic series. Sweeping the Morph axis produces some lovely
comb filtering effects, which can be either subtle or dramatic
depending on other settings ( especially that of Transform 2).
Morph:  Use this to sweep the peaks/notches.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Tunes the filter and controls resonance.
F184 OddHrm+rez
This filter cube, based on the odd harmonic series, provides a
number of comb-filtering effects. Use the Morph Offset to control
filter ‘Q’, and Frequency Tracking and Transform 2 to tune the
filter.
Morph:  Increasing this parameter pushes the filter towards a flat
curve.
Freq. Tracking:  Tunes the filter.
Transform 2:  Tunes the filter. Higher values add a high-frequency
bump.
Z-PLANE FILTER DESCRIPTIONS