PSYCHOPHYSICAL CALIBRATION FOR CONTROLLING THE RANGE
OF A VIRTUAL SOUND SOURCE:
MULTIDIMENSIONAL COMPLEXITY IN SPATIAL AUDITORY DISPLAY
William L. Martens
Multimedia Systems Lab.
University of Aizu
Aizu-Wakamatsu 965-8580, Japan
wlm@u-aizu.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
Just as control over perceived azimuth and elevation of a virtual
sound source should be psychophysically calibrated in spatial au-
ditory display, so should perceived range; however, in contrast to
azimuth and elevation display, precise control over auditory range
has been difﬁcult to achieve. This is partly due to the multidimen-
sional complexity of the human response to spatial auditory stimu-
lation, but it is also due to the multidimensional complexity of the
acoustic stimulus for range, which includes a substantial number
of independent parameters even in the case of static spatial posi-
tioning of sound source relative to listener. In the static case, there
is strong dependence of perceived range upon at least the following
display parameters: direct sound level, indirect sound level, inter-
aural cross-correlation, and the relation between direct and indi-
rect sound spectra associated with air absorption and close-range
head-related effects. If the sound source range varies smoothly
over time, other display parameters (such as dynamic variation in
pitch of the direct sound, or Doppler shift, and also dynamic vari-
ation in the initial time gap) become signiﬁcant, and interact with
the above-listed parameters to produce changes in auditory range
that have proven difﬁcult to successfully model. In the absence of
a model that integrates variation in all of these display parameters
and successfully predicts range variation, two reasonable solutions
to the problem of range control present themselves. The ﬁrst is to
base control upon highly realistic simulation, relying on the rel-
atively good match between perceived range and speciﬁed range
that can be observed when nearly all displayed auditory spatial
information is consistent with an adequate physical model. The
second solution is to base control upon psychophysical range judg-
ments under conditions of expected use of the display, relying on
an inversion of a range prediction model ﬁt to the judgments using
multiple regression analysis. This paper presents two examples of
successful psychophysical calibration for auditory range control
for spatially static sources: One case employed a simpliﬁed model
of range-dependence in simulated head-related transfer functions
for headphone display of virtual sources at close range (within the
listener’s personal space). The other case employed a room-related
(rather than head-related) loudspeaker-based sound simulation to
create auditory imagery of sources relatively far away from a group
of simultaneous listeners. This room-related loudspeaker system
was designed with the pragmatic goal of reducing reliance upon
ﬁxed, known listening locations. In both cases, adequate control
over the range of a set of sound sources (short speech samples)
was achieved using a look-up table derived by inverting the range
prediction equation ﬁt to collected human range ratings.
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Psychophysical validation versus calibration
The development of technology for the auditory display of vir-
tual sound sources in virtual acoustical spaces has received great
beneﬁts from a long history of research on the acoustic cues used
by human listeners in the formation of auditory spatial imagery.
These beneﬁts have accrued primarily from the results of psy-
chophysical investigations, controlled studies of the relationship
between observed physical features of the sound stimuli, and re-
ported attributes of the perceptual response to those stimuli. In
contrast to such basic scientiﬁc research, this paper emphasizes a
more applied approach to psychophysical investigation. Whereas
the primary motivation in spatial hearing research has been to gain
greater understanding of the mechanisms of human spatial hear-
ing, the motivation for this applied research has been the veriﬁca-
tion and validation of various spatial audio rendering technologies
under development. As the ultimate goal here is the deployment
of auditory display technology for which speciﬁed responses are in
some way calibrated to the actual responses of the human listener,
the term “psychophysical calibration” is employed to identify this
endeavor.
1
When auditory and visual displays are integrated into a spa-
tially coordinated human-computer interface, a ﬁrst step in setting
up such a multi-modal display system is to make sure that cor-
responding points in the respective perceptual spaces are in good
registration to each other. The most direct approach to solving this
problem is to execute an egocentric cross-modal matching task for
the two display modalities. Here, the issue is not so much valida-
tion as it is calibration. Validation is what is done when system
performance is uncertain at a basic level. Calibration is what is
done when a system is known to make distinctions consistently in
the displayed attributes for a particular modality, but the question
of mapping the display space for that sensory modality remains.
One premise of this paper is that this sort of calibration should
be completed for an auditory display even in the development of
spatial interface systems that might be termed “audio-only.”
1Of course, no mutually exclusive bodies of research exist that might
be identiﬁed as pure-basic versus pure-applied research. In fact, it might
be argued that the interplay between researchers with engineering goals
and those with scientiﬁc goals provide an essential tension [1] that drives
progress for the entire ﬁeld. The reader is refered to the author’s paper
[2] on “Uses and misuses of psychophysical methods in the evaluation of
spatial sound reproduction” for further discussion of this issue.
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-197
It is almost never the case that the perceived locations of vir-
tual sound sources are irrelevant to the deployment of spatial au-
dio rendering technology. Therefore, knowledge of the actual per-
ceived locations will almost always be needed, so that a good map-
ping between speciﬁed and resulting source locations is conﬁrmed.
For example, if a virtual space is navigated by a user wearing a
head-mounted display (
HMD ), the perceived locations of invisible
virtual acoustic objects must change in an expected way if they are
to be perceived as spatially stationary sound sources. In this case,
a match is implicitly made between the location (perhaps propri-
oceptively determined) of the user’s ego-center (or self) in physi-
cal space and the mental projection of that point into the auditory
space created by the virtual acoustic display.
1.2. Veridicality and Constancy
Veridical perception is what is expected when stimulation is ad-
equately full and realistic. Unfortunately, spatial auditory dis-
plays typically rely upon incomplete virtual acoustic simulations,
and typically provide impoverished range cues (especially the dy-
namic auditory cues associated with active localization behavior
[3]). When veridicality is lost due to overly simpliﬁed virtual
acoustic simulation, something else is typically lost along with it:
the constancy phenomena , which are those phenomena that keep
variations in source loudness from becoming variations in auditory
range as well as variations in source loudness. In order to discuss
loudness constancy, it is necessary to make clear the distinction
between proximal and distal stimulation:
“Stimulation deﬁned at the level of the [sense]
receptors is called proximal stimulation. Stimula-
tion deﬁned at the level of the physical objects out-
side O [(the observer)] is called distal stimulation.
     
A proportionality between perceptions anddistal
rather than proximal stimulation is termed the con-
stancy phenomena.” (Gogel [4], p. 367)
For example, if there is loudness constancy with varying sound
source range, as reported in [5], then the perceived loudness of a
source of constantdistal sound pressure level (SPL ) will not change
as its physical range is changed (though large changes in proximal
SPL will be observed).
1.3. Level-Based Range Control:
A Fundamental Ambiguity
The typical solution to the problem of controlling auditory range
has been to use changing source loudness as the primary cue, but
this solution presents an ambiguous stimulus to the user as changes
in
SPL at the source position are not as easily discriminated as
changes in loudness at the listening position. The ambiguity stems
from the difﬁculty of determining whether changes in theproximal
SPL (i.e., level at the ear) are caused by changes in distal SPL (i.e.,
level at the source position) or by changes in source range. In
fact, it is conceivable that a change in level due to a change in
source range could be accompanied by a complementary change in
level at the source position (distal
SPL ), and these changes would
go unnoticed as there would be no net change in level at the ear
(proximal SPL ).
The primary means available for resolving this ambiguity in
auditory spatial display of source range is the inclusion of ap-
propriate indirect sound. This factor is especially powerful under
conditions in which the synthetic indirect sound is clearly sepa-
rable from the direct sound, as it is in spatially immersive multi-
loudspeaker displays such as the Pioneer Sound Field Controller
[6], or
PSFC (described more fully in section 3 of this paper).
In contrast to conventional two-loudspeaker sound spatialization,
sound sources presented via thePSFC remain at relatively stable lo-
cations in space as listeners change the position and orientation of
their heads. In addition, such loudspeaker arrays avoid most of the
difﬁculties associated with headphone-based presentations using
binaural techniques (e.g., convolution with head-related transfer
functions, or
HRTF s), such as front

back reversals and problems
with externalization. An immersive loudspeaker array enables a
direct approach to the creation of enveloping virtual acoustics, re-
sulting in a soundﬁeld stabilization that naturally requires no head-
tracking. Of course, as the reverberation simulation is “room-
related” rather than “head-related” [7], the system exhibits none
of the advantages associated with cross-talk cancellation ( a.k.a.
transaural stereo [8]), which extend to improved display of audi-
tory range as well as direction (e.g., precise control over interaural
cross-correlation at the listener’s ear is possible only when the sys-
tem is head-related).
In contrast to the control of auditory range possible in public
spaces, there is another means available for resolving level-based
ambiguity in the auditory range of virtual sources located at close
range. For headphone-based auditory display, a modiﬁcation of
the
HRTF deployment can also be implemented to allow for range-
based transformation of the direct sound. Such range-based vari-
ation in the HRTF has been well documented for sources within
arm’s reach of the listener [9], and their effectiveness in produc-
ing changes in range perception in the listener’s “personal space”
has been established [10]. Of course, such HRTF -based control
is not practicable when using loudspeaker arrays for multiple lis-
teners (such as the “room-based” PSFC system), but it is possible
in “head-related” loudspeaker reproduction employing cross-talk
cancellation.
1.4. Static Auditory Range Cues
Rather than giving a comprehensive treatment to the psychoacous-
tics of range, the emphasis here is upon acoustic cues that are read-
ily and often simulated in spatial auditory display. This paper is
concerned primarily with how to control auditory range when us-
ing simulated cues, and those cues are only brieﬂy summarized
here (the reader is refered to [11] for a deeper treatment of acous-
tic cues used in the control of auditory range.).
The most powerful static auditory range cues in the static case
include direct sound level, direct sound spectrum, indirect sound
level, and interaural cross-correlation (
IACC ).2 In fact, the best
2Control of range via manipulation of IACC is more complex than the
two cases to be discussed in this paper, but can be very effective especially
in loudspeaker reproduction. It is complex because the effect of IACC on
range depends on its many parameters (e.g., initial time gap ( ITG ), fre-
quency band, etc.) that are typically only indirectly controlled through the
manipulation of other simulation details. If the gap in time between direct
sound and the arrival of the ﬁrst indirect sound is small enough (as it is
in relatively small rooms), then the early indirect sound will be perceptu-
ally fused with the direct sound to form a precedent image of the sound
source that has discriminable depth, breadth, and range. And these percep-
tual attributes are discriminable from perceptual attributes associated with
later-arriving indirect sound [12]. While values of
IACC measured over the
complete duration of the system response predict auditory source width
(an attribute of the precedent image), the
IACC values measured separately
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-198
predictors of auditory range are typically expressed as some com-
bination of these individual parameters. For example, the ratio be-
tween direct sound level and indirect sound level, often expressed
as the indirect-to-direct (    ) ratio, is a better predictor of range
than direct sound level alone: Though direct sound level is a good
relative cue to range, if the direct sound level is decreased in the
presence of an indirect sound ﬁeld of nearly constant level, their
interrelation provides a more effective auditory range cue. Indeed,
if overall sound level is held constant as the
   ratio is increased,
the reported auditory range of the sound source will also increase
[14]. For this reason, in combination with the direct sound level,
the    ratio often provides additional range control (and predic-
tive power).
In a more complex example, the spectral cues to auditory range
are effective mostly via the relation between direct and indirect
sound spectra, but the dependence is complex in that the predicted
range follows a “U”-shaped function of spectral centroid (a global
measure of spectral energy distribution correlated with perceived
brightness): If all other factors are held constant, then when the
spectral centroid of the direct sound is increased relative to that
that of the indirect sound, the auditory range of a nearby source
will increase, while the auditory range of a distant source will de-
crease.
3 The physical basis for the confusion is straightforward:
Within 2 m of the listener’s head, low frequencies are boosted at
the ear due to the spherical shape of the wavefront arriving from a
nearby source [18] [19], but as range is increased beyond 2 m, the
high-frequency components of the nearly planar wavefront lose
energy (due to air absorption) more rapidly with increasing range
than do the low-frequency components.
1.5. Targeting the Listener’s Head or the Listener’s Room
In Bauer’s seminal 1961 work [20] entitled “Stereophonic ear-
phones and binaural loudspeakers,” he describes the means for
reproducing head-related auditory spatial imagery via two loud-
speakers. Before such a distinction was introduced, perhaps some
loudspeaker systems were tacitly room-related, which would have
been an appropriate choice for a public auditory spatial display
system with more than one simultaneous listener. Though it might
be thought that room-related reproduction of indirect sound was
anticipated in the early 1960’s work on multi-channel spatial sound
reproduction at the University of Gottingen (see for example the
1965 paper by Meyer, et al. [21]), the design of that apparatus
(which featured 65 loudspeakers!) assumed that the listener was
in a ﬁxed location relative to the loudspeakers, and therefore must
also be regarded as a head-related spatial auditory display system.
It was probably not until Moore’s 1983 paper [22] entitled “A gen-
eral model for spatial processing of sounds,” that the concept of
a room-related reproduction of indirect sound was explicitly de-
scribed as a system intended for multiple listeners located at arbi-
trary locations within the reproduction space. In such room-related
for early and later arriving sound are also powerful predictors for many
of these perceptual attributes: The late IACC predicts listener envelopment
(the sense of feeling spatially surrounded by sound), but the early IACC
predicts range of the precedent image [13].
3In fact, under reduced conditions of observation (i.e., impoverished
range cues), an exclusive bias towards one or the other of these two pat-
terns of response has been exhibited by different subjects within a sin-
gle experiment. Though brighter sources are typically judged closer than
darker sources in the free ﬁeld [15] [16], the addition of unﬁltered indirect
sound to a set of ﬁltered binaural stimuli caused 6 out of 24 listeners to
consistently judge brighter sources to be farther than darker sources [17].
spatial sound reproduction, the loudspeaker locations act as win-
dows for sound to enter an imaginary box deﬁned by connecting
those loudspeaker locations, and virtual sources are typically lo-
calized only outside the borders of this box (localized, that is, out-
side the boundaries deﬁned by the perceived loudspeaker locations
within the listener’s auditory space). In contrast, the loudspeak-
ers in head-related spatial sound reproduction should disappear to
enable virtual sources to be localized anywhere in the listener’s
auditory space (nearby or faraway).
These two fundamental types of auditory display can be iden-
tiﬁed in terms of their assumptions about the spatial relation be-
tween listener and display. The reproduction system (headphone-
or loudspeaker-based) is identiﬁed as “head-related” when the re-
lation between proximal stimuli delivered to the user’s ears is known
and/or determined via either headtracking or immobilization of the
user’s head. The system is identiﬁed as “room-related” if the lo-
cation of the user’s ears relative to sound reproduction devices is
disregarded (though perhaps still relevant to system performance).
The two systems examined in this paper differ in just these as-
sumptions about the spatial orientation of listener to display. One
of the two is a personal display system employing eyescreens and
earspeakers (i.e., an
HMD ); the other is a public display system
featuring a large (wide-angle) screen and a multi-loudspeaker ar-
ray intended for many simultaneous listener – perhaps this case
could be termed a room-mounted display (or RMD ). The follow-
ing two sections of this paper deal separately with the perceptual
calibration of auditory range display for each of these systems.
2. RANGE CONTROL FOR NEARBY SOURCES:
AUDITORY DISPLAY IN PERSONAL SPACE
Typically, personal, headphone-based auditory spatial display tech-
nology either fails to project (externalize) the auditory image of
the distal stimulus to a location in the listener’s auditory repre-
sentation of the surrounding space (i.e., no “out-of-head localiza-
tion”), or the source may be well externalized, but projected to
a location at some greater distance from the listener, most often
via the inclusion of a signiﬁcant amount of reverberation that is
easily detectable by the listener. The goal of the experiment re-
ported here, most succinctly put, was to test an efﬁcient means to
place a well-externalized virtual sound source so close to the lis-
tener’s ear that it enters the listener’s “personal space” [23]. When
the distally projected auditory image of a virtual sound source en-
ters the listener’s “personal space,” a psychological boundary is
crossed that potentially carries special meaning to users in particu-
lar applications such as teleconferencing in shared virtual acoustic
environments. If such an audio transformation were properly en-
gineered (both perceptually valid and perceptually calibrated), a
spoken message could be made to sound as if it were whispered
into the ear of the recipient, letting them know, for instance, that
the message was intended for them in conﬁdence (providing what
has been termed a “whisper function” [24]).
One of the continuing problems of headphone-based virtual
acoustic imagery has been the difﬁculty of creating auditory im-
ages that are clearly outside of the listener’s head using a minimum
amount of audio signal processing. The use of
HRTF s is conven-
tionally regarded as the ﬁrst step in creating externalized auditory
imagery [25], but this is only moderately effective for some spa-
tial directions of the sound source [26], and truly unreliable [27].
Without simulated indirect sound of some sort, the likely result in
headphone listening is “in-head localization” of the auditory im-
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-199
age of the reproduced sound source [28]. The desired result in
headphone reproduction, in contrast, is “out-of-head localization”
and has often been shown to be dependent upon the amount of re-
verberation present in sound reproduction (c.f., [29]). But factors
other than
HRTF -based processing and indirect sound simulation
can also aid in externalization. It may be that actively tracking the
user’s head motion and applying appropriate dynamically varying
HRTF s to an input audio signal, can improve externalization. How-
ever, the primary beneﬁt of active headtracking in auditory spatial
display is the disambiguation of front and rear locations, and the
actual beneﬁts in terms of externalization are questionable [27].
The study described below is based upon an unexpected observa-
tion of externalized auditory imagery during binaural listening to
nearby sound sources in an anechoic chamber. When sources ar-
rive from locations further than 1 m from the listener’s head, or
near the listener’s median plane, externalization is usually not ex-
perienced. But well lateralized sources located near the listener’s
head often do result in externalization. The practical question driv-
ing this experiment was that concerning which acoustic cues are
most important to include in a simulation intended to produce this
close-range externalization.
Of course there are many acoustical sources of information
cueing auditory range that are available to the human listener at
close range, but this study focuses only on the very simple case of
dry
HRTF -based processing (i.e., involving no indirect sound sim-
ulation). In particular, it was the level-based cues contained in the
direct sound that seemed worth examining. The idea that variation
of interaural level difference (
ILD ) in the direct sound might aid
the listener in detecting range of nearby sources is not new (the
hypothesis was probably ﬁrst stated clearly by Hartley and Fry
in 1922 [30]). Brungart [31] conﬁrmed that listener’s indeed do
better in localizing nearby anechoic sources when those sources
are well lateralized away from the listener’s median plane. In the
author’s related study [10] that compared the relative salience of
four sources of acoustical information associated with range per-
ception for the human listener, the level-based features of the direct
sound (ipsilateral-ear
SPL and ILD ) dominated other cues (indirect-
to-direct sound ratio and high-frequency attenuation of a ﬁlter sim-
ulating the head-shadow).
The choice to focus on
ILD -based range cues via a simple ma-
nipulation of ipsilateral and contralateral SPL was also motivated
by the lack of an efﬁcient yet effective technology for creating au-
ditory images that are clearly outside of the listener’s head, but
nonetheless very close to the listener’s ear. Free-ﬁeld listening in
an anechoic chamber conﬁrms that sources within around 1 m of
the listener’s head are often externalized and have a special quality
that tells the listener that the source is nearby. Although measured
HRTF s show a rather complex dependence on range, an analysis of
the range dependence in the response of an ideal spherical receiver
shows one very striking feature that might account for this special
quality. That feature is shown in Fig. 1 for a source at

    az-
imuth. Though the gain at DC is nearly 0 dB for sources arriving
from ranges greater than 2 m, the interaural level difference ( ILD )
at DC gain grows large as the source approaches the listener’s ear.
As the gain increases at the listener’s ipsilateral ear, the gain de-
creases at the listener’s contralateral ear. In contrast to the relative
auditory range cue provided by loudness, it has been hypothesized
that this range-dependent variation in
ILD might provide a more
absolute range cue to the listener for nearby sources, and that these
might be effectively externalized without the contribution typically
made by indirect sound.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Ipsi
Contra
DC Gain (dB)
Range (m)
Figure 1: Free-ﬁeld normalized gain at DC for a point on the sur-
face of an ideal spherical “head” as a function of source range
from the center of the sphere. The upper curve (labeled “Ipsi”)
corresponds to the ipsilateral “ear” response for a source incidence
angle of

  

azimuth, while the lower curve (labeled “Contra”)
corresponds to the contralateral response at that angle. The verti-
cal dashed line shows the model “head” radius of .0875 m. (On the
assumption that this paper may be less frequently read in black &
white print than in its original electronic form, the graphic includes
a color code: the ipsilateral curve is red and the contralateral curve
is blue.)
2.1. Stimuli
For this experiment, three short utterances, “ha,” “hi,” and “hu,”
whispered by three Japanese talkers, were recorded at a range of
1 meter in a large anechoic chamber at the University of Aizu.
Whispered (unvoiced) speech was chosen rather voiced speech,
since whispered speech contains relatively less reliable informa-
tion about actualdistal
SPL . Likely due to the recognition of “vocal
effort” associated with particular speech production levels, voiced
speech contains range cues that seem to be inherent in the timbre
of the sound source itself [32]. The three vowel sounds whispered
by the talkers for this study span the vowel space deﬁned by the
ﬁrst two formant frequencies of the vowels, and they represent the
extremes of vowel coloration in the Japanese language.
4 The in-
tention of this sound source selection was to allow the spatially-
processed stimuli to vary in timbre as widely as possible while
maintaining the same aspiration /h/ in the consonant-vowel ( CV)
stimuli. The transient, high-frequency content of the /h/ conso-
nant was included to provide adequate stimulation for perceptual
fusion of the stimulus into a single, coherent auditory image of the
whispered speech sound.
The spatial sound processing of the stimuli was a variation of
the conventional convolution with a pair of
HRTF s (subject MES ,
see [38]) with no simulated indirect sound. The baseline convo-
4On average, the ﬁrst formant frequencies range from 280 to 750 Hz
and the second formant frequencies range from 1100 to 2300 Hz when sub-
jects read word lists [33]. TheLPC spectra of the speech stimuli used in this
study were calculated for each of the four talkers. The average frequencies
of the ﬁrst two formants for the vowel segments of their recorded speech
were approximately the following: /a/ – 750, 1200, /i/ – 280, 2280, and /u/
– 310, 1220 Hz.
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-200
lution condition used an anechoically measured HRTF pair for a
source arriving from the rear at 
    azimuth and from a range
of 1.5 meter. Close range auditory range cues were then manip-
ulated strictly in terms of the relative SPL of the ipsilateral- and
contralateral-ear signals. The level of the resulting ipsilateral-ear
signal was increased from its baseline level in three 3 dB steps
(gain was 0 dB, 3 dB, 6 dB, and 9 dB). The level of the result-
ing contralateral-ear signal was decreased from its baseline level
in three 3 dB steps (gain was 0 dB, -3 dB, -6 dB, and -9 dB). No
frequency-dependent component of the head-response model was
manipulated in order to match the change in the head shadow as
sources approach ranges closer than 1 m (c.f., [10]). A factorial
combination of ipsilateral and contralateral level was executed by
crossing the four possible values for each stimulus, and each of 9
sound sources (
   factorial of talkers and vowels) was combined
in a randomized order for these 16 SPL combinations (   facto-
rial of ipsi and contra), to produce the set of 144 stimuli compris-
ing a single experimental listening session (of which three were
completed by each subject).
2.2. Subjects
Five subjects voluntarily participated in this experiment, four of
whom were students at the University of Aizu. One was the author,
a researcher with a substantial history of participation in similar
listening tests. All were audiologically normal, with no reported
hearing loss.10 0
      ! 
  # % ' ) ' 
951
+ ,
! .
,

/ !   #  )
Figure 2: Graphic illustrating the ten-point scale used by listen-
ers to record the range of the comparison stimulus relative to the
position of the standard stimulus. See text for details.
2.3. Procedure
The stimuli were presented to the listeners via Sennheiser
HD 590
headphones using the standard audio conversion hardware of an
SGI workstation. The listening test was completed in three blocks
of 144 trials each. In each trial, two stimuli were presented with a
one-second inter-stimulus interval: a comparison stimulus of vari-
able range, and a standard stimulus of ﬁxed range. The baseline
convolution condition (no gain adjustment) served as the standard
stimulus that provided a reference by which listeners judged the
range of the other experimental stimuli. After hearing ﬁrst the
standard and then the comparison stimulus, the listener was asked
to rate the range of the comparison on a scale from
 to 
  . The
value of  was to be reported if the auditory image was located
inside of the listener’s head. The value of 
 was to be used if the
sound source seemed to be located extremely close to the listener’s
ear (i.e., the “verged cranial” position). The other extreme of the
0 3 6 90
2
4
6
8
10
9
6
3
0
Contralateral Attenuation (dB)
Mean Range Rating
Figure 3: Grand mean range ratings for one subject plotted over
contralateral attenuation levels, combining results for three vowel
sounds whispered by three native speakers of Japanese. The pa-
rameter of the graph is ipsilateral gain level, the values of which
are used to label each of the four sets of connected plotting sym-
bols (appearing just to the right of each). In the electronic color
version of this paper, the plotting symbols and the connecting lines
for the lowest ipsilateral gain level (0 dB) are red (and the plotting
symbols for this set are the smallest in the graph). Ratings for the
3 dB gain stimuli are coded green, those for the 6 dB gain stimuli
are coded blue, and those for the 9 dB gain stimuli are coded black
(and the plotting symbols for this set are the largest in the graph).
Standard error bars for each mean follow the same coding scheme.
scale was anchored to the perceived range of the standard stim-
ulus, and the response of

  was to be given to any source that
was perceived at roughly the same range as the that of the standard
stimulus. The value of
2 was to be given to a source just noticeably
closer than the standard.
A three-minute training session was completed before begin-
ning the experimental trials, during which time listeners were to
attempt to establish criteria for their use of the rating scale. The
inter-trial interval during the training session was just one second,
and this interval was increased to ﬁve seconds during experimental
trials to allow time for a response to be generated.
2.4. Results
The inﬂuence of ipsilateral gain and contralateral attenuation on
mean range ratings for one subject are shown in Fig. 3. The high-
est mean range ratings were obtained for a comparison stimulus
that was identical to the standard stimulus. Thus, of all the com-
binations of ipsilateral and contralateral
SPL present in the set of
comparison stimuli, the greatest source range was reported when
the nine sound sources were convolved with the unmodiﬁed HRTF
(the standard stimulus, and the baseline convolution condition).
As the ipsilateral gain was increased, and contralateral attenua-
tion was held constant at 0 dB, reported range decreased for the
source, which consistently seemed to be arriving from the rear at
around

  

azimuth. The rightmost symbols in the graph shown
in Fig. 3 show this decrease from range ratings of around 
  to
ratings around 3 . The plotting symbols grow larger in the graph as
ipsilateral gain is increased, as a reminder that these sources are ap-
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-201
proaching the listener (i.e., simulating visual looming). When the
ipsilateral gain was held constant at 0 dB, and contralateral attenu-
ation was increased, reported range also decreased, but not to such
a great extent. The topmost curve, labeled “0” in the plot, shows
decreases from range ratings of around

  to ratings of only around
2 . But when the ipsilateral gain was held constant at an SPL 9d B
greater than that of the standard stimulus, increasing contralateral
attenuation produced much lower range ratings (decreasing from
ratings of around
3 to ratings below 4 ). It is clear from these data
that larger ILD s result in increasingly closer source localization as
the ipsilateral SPL increases. In effect, the close-range ILD cue
works best when the whispered speech is so loud that it is already
likely to produce a lower range rating.
2.5. Discussion
A general principle that helps to understand these results is that one
perception may sometimes depend upon another perception. For
example, Gogel [4] made this same point about how visual cues to
exocentric distance (i.e., differential displacements) depend upon
the observer’s judgments of perceived egocentric (absolute) dis-
tance:
“[Because] differential displacements are inde-
terminate with respect to an exocentric distance with-
out specifying an egocentric distance, a perception
of egocentric distance is required to translate these
cues to a perception of exocentric distance.” (Gogel
[4], p. 367)
It is also true that judgments of auditory range depend not only
on perceptual factors, but also upon cognitive factors that inﬂu-
ence human perceptual judgment. It is clear that response biases
(tendencies) contribute to both absolute (egocentric) and relative
(exocentric) distance judgments, and that listeners rely upon these
biases more and more as the adequacy of the stimulus cues is re-
duced. In the absence of strong absolute cues to auditory range,
all stimuli will tend to be perceived at some speciﬁc range, typi-
cally rather near the listener (Gogel [34] termed this tendency the
speciﬁc distance tendency). In static free-ﬁeld listening, for exam-
ple, anechoic sound sources produced at a variety of ranges greater
than 1 m typically tend to be perceived at a range somewhat less
than 1 m, even when the proximal
SPL is quite low.
The manipulations in the above-described experiment clearly
produce relatively strong cues to auditory range, but also demon-
strate an interaction between two predictors of range, quantiﬁed as
ipsilateral gain and contralateral attenuation. It is a straightforward
application of Multiple Regression Analysis (MRA ) to characterize
this interaction in terms of a prediction equation. Regression in-
version in the multiple predictor case is well described elsewhere
[35]. The inversion of the prediction equation allows a contralat-
eral attenuation value to be determined so that a source at a desired
loudness (which speciﬁes the ipsilateral gain value) can also be po-
sitioned at a particular range, at least for whispered speech sources
arriving at an incidence angle of

  

azimuth. The utility of such
inverse prediction may seem limited, but may in fact match well
the requirements of some application, such as delivering a voice
message from an angle outside of the user’s visual ﬁeld, and at a
range close enough to cause the user to notice it immediately. Fur-
thermore, the importance of the spoken message can be indicated
by how close to the user’s ear the source seems to be located. The
details of the inverse prediction via
MRA are explained in the con-
text of the following study of faraway sources, since the numerical
problem to be solved there is virtually identical to the problem to
be solved here (and so a highly redundant explication of the analy-
sis for inverse prediction is here omitted from this paper). Sufﬁce it
to say that a multivariate linear equation can be inverted to provide
required values of one predictor variable when the values of both
the criterion variable and the other predictor variable are speciﬁed.
3. RANGE CONTROL FOR FARA WAY SOURCES:
AUDITORY DISPLAY IN PUBLIC SPACE
Controlling the perceived direction and range of virtual sound sources
is desired in multi-channel loudspeaker-based spatial auditory dis-
plays for use in immersive multimedia applications such as tele-
conferencing and entertainment. The “Synthetic World Zone” at
the University of Aizu Multimedia Center is an example of a space
designed to present multimodal virtual environments. This immer-
sive multimedia display system presents stereographic visual im-
agery via three large rear-projection video screens covering a

 5 

horizontal visual angle (each screen is 3.4 m  8.1 m). Collocated
with this visual display is the Pioneer Sound Field Controller [6],
or PSFC , a 15-loudspeaker hemispherical array with a diameter of
approximately 10 m. The loudspeakers in this array are positioned
in a relatively dry space which comfortably seats about 20 listen-
ers, and together these loudspeakers create a reverberant sound-
ﬁeld simulation with a realistic spatial and temporal distribution of
many discrete reﬂections. The research reported here was focussed
upon the performance of this “room-related” spatial auditory dis-
play with regard to the localization of virtual sound sources in an
immersive virtual acoustic environment; however, it was control
of auditory range, in particular, that posed a problem for the
PSFC
user.
3.1. Pioneer Sound Field Controller
The Pioneer Sound Field Controller (PSFC ) is integrated with other
display systems in the “Synthetic World Zone” via a personal com-
puter. The system controls the direction of two virtual sound sources
via a straightforward interpolation of level between the three loud-
speakers surrounding the desired spatial angle (speciﬁed by az-
imuth and elevation angles). The level at each loudspeaker is deter-
mined by the angular distance between the virtual source and each
loudspeaker (c.f., Gerzon’s [36] Periphony: “with-height sound
reproduction”). Discrete simulated reﬂections are generated inde-
pendently for each of the 15 loudspeakers, rather than employing
an
HRTF to control the direction of each early reﬂection (as taught
by Kendall & Martens [37]). In effect, a room-related transfer
function is implemented via transmission through the solid angle
subtended by the loudspeaker’s “window” that lets sound in from
outside of the reproduction space. Thus, the
PSFC loudspeakers
deliver many simulated discrete reﬂections, each arriving from the
direction of one of the 15 loudspeakers, and each at an appropriate
delay and gain, but with no speciﬁc listener position assumed (cf.
[21]).
In contrast to source direction, control over auditory range of
virtual sources using the
PSFC is not so straightforward. The loud-
speakers are all placed at an approximately constant distance from
the room’s center, but the range of each virtual source from the lis-
tening position is controlled primarily by two parameters: Firstly,
the overall volume of the source can be adjusted to create a relative
cue to auditory range [39]. Secondly, a more absolute cue to au-
ditory range may be manipulated via the ratio of indirect to direct
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-202
Channel
 Stimulus Sentence
1 (standard)
 Ford hit
 No ﬁve
raw crime.
 leave court.
2 (comparison)
 Are raw
 Who bought
mouse lush.
 blond fern.
Table 1: Alternating sequential presentation of four short sentences for judging the auditory range of the comparison stimulus relative to
the standard stimulus. These are public-domain sources that have been used in the author’s previous studies [38].
(   ) sound levels [40], since the indirect sound level in typical
simulated rooms (of fairly large dimensions) is not modulated by
source range to as great an extent as the direct sound level is modu-
lated. In fact, the default conﬁguration (which was employed in the
current study) is based upon an analysis of the reﬂection patterns of
a large assembly hall (the Shinjuku Kousei Nenkin Kaikan), about
halfway back from the stage, where indirect sound level remains
practically constant when the source range increases from a start-
ing point at least 5 m from the listening position (1.5 m above the
ﬂoor). Thus as a source recedes from the listener in this space, only
the direct sound level decreases, gradually disappearing into the
reverberant “grass” presented by the constant-level indirect sound.
The
PSFC controls the    ratio via a “liveness” parameter
(a term perhaps ﬁrst connected with    by Maxﬁeld & Alber-
sheim [41] to describe this psychoacoustic parameter associated
with reverberation in enclosed spaces). Though this parameter has
also been associated with the term “spaciousness” in related work
[42], reverberation time also affects subjective ratings of spacious-
ness [43] (in German, “R¨ aumlichkeit”).
5 In the PSFC system, sev-
eral parameters are adjusted in an inter-dependent fashion in order
to maintain a relatively constant “room impression” (in German,
“Raumeindruck”), as changes occur in the liveness or “reverber-
ance” (in German, “Hallichkeit”). The way in which the
PSFC
handles the complicated situation that arises as liveness is adjusted
is the following: First, as the speciﬁed liveness is reduced, the rate
at which discrete reﬂection gain falls over time is increased, so that
the reverberation time stays ﬁxed (thereby minimizing changes in
the perceived size of the simulated room). This change in decay
rate of the early reﬂections allows the level of the last discrete re-
ﬂection to match the level of the late diffuse reverberant ﬁeld. Sec-
ond, the actual
PSFC channel volume setting, which is applied to
both direct and indirect sound equally, is internally adjusted so
as to maintain a constant loudness as the liveness value is ma-
nipulated. Since the liveness parameter is usually constant for a
given space, progressively changing its value poses something of a
dilemma for the listener. As the source loudness remains constant
with increasing liveness of the simulated space, thedistal stimulus
seems to be producing progressively greater
SPL as it recedes into
the distance. This complex situation, complicated even more by
the operation of what might truly be termed “loudness constancy”
with varying sound source distance [5], underscores the difﬁculty
of controlling auditory range that exists for almost all virtual audi-
tory display systems. This difﬁculty stems from the fundamental
ambiguity inherent in level-based range control.
A psychophysical experiment was conducted in order to deter-
mine how best to adjust the multiple relevant
PSFC parameters that
affect the auditory range of a virtual sound source. The ultimate
5German translations of terms describing perceptual attributes of spatial
sound reproduction are included here as a bridge between the German and
English language literature on this topic, in the belief that improved cross
fertilization between these bodies of literature might beneﬁt both.
goal was the development of a psychophysically calibrated control
for the perceived source range using the PSFC . For all experimen-
tal stimuli, a constant value of 67 ms was set for the initial time
gap between direct and indirect sound arrival (corresponding pri-
marily to the size of the simulated space). This is well outside of
the estimated 6 ms integration time of the auditory system within
which indirect sound is perceptually fused with the direct sound in
producing range judgments [44].
A set of 25 stimuli were formed by combining ﬁve values each
of both
PSFC channel volume and the PSFC liveness parameter. As
was pointed out before, the liveness parameter sets the    ratio,
and changes in the PSFC channel volume do not modify this ratio.
Also recall that as liveness is reduced, the rate at which discrete re-
ﬂection gain falls over time is increased, so that the reverberation
time stays ﬁxed, and the level of the last discrete reﬂection is made
to match the level of the late diffuse reverberant ﬁeld. These so-
phisticated controls create complicated interdependencies between
simulation parameters, which presents a challenge regarding the
control of virtual source range (for which no primitive parame-
ter was originally provided). In effect, accurate control of vir-
tual source range is confounded by variations in both the liveness
parameter and in overall channel volume. Therefore, the direct
empirical approach employed here was to derive a look-up table
for source range based upon the results of psychophysical experi-
ments.
3.2. Stimuli, Subjects, and Procedure
Four short speech samples, each a phonetically-rich sentence, were
anechoically recorded to serve as the sound sources for range rat-
ing sessions. Table 1 shows these four sentences, and the manner
in which they were presented via the two channels of the
PSFC .
The ﬁrst and third sentence stimuli together served as a standard
reference of extreme auditory range, against which the auditory
range of the second and fourth sentence stimuli was to be com-
pared. The parameters of these two comparison stimulus sentences
varied from trial to trial, while the standard stimulus sentences
were always presented at a ﬁxed
PSFC channel volume and live-
ness.
Measurements of PSFC Sound Pressure Level (SPL ) were made
using an integrating sound level meter (the NL-04 from Rion Co.,
Ltd.). Ambient background noise levels were high due to the
presence of computer systems, ampliﬁer cooling fans, and other
equipment. The stimuli ranged from 46 – 70 dBA, which was con-
ﬁrmed by independent measurements of all four stimulus speech
segments, at the ﬁve volumes employed in the second experiment
(6 dB steps), and for the ﬁve liveness values employed. Due to
the non-stationary nature of these speech stimuli, the physical cal-
ibration of
PSFC volume control was checked using a pink noise
source, and the pink noise levels set by the PSFC correlated highly
with the levels measured for the speech stimuli (6 7 
 
2 2 3 ).
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-203
−24 −18 −12 −6 00
25
50
75
100
Liveness=16
Liveness=255
Volume (dB)
Range Rating
16 32 64 128 2550
25
50
75
100
Volume=−24 dB
Volume=−12 dB
Volume=0 dB
Liveness (index)
Range Rating
Figure 4: Left: Grand mean range ratings plotted over PSFC channel volume for all 11 listeners at liveness values of 16, 32, 64, 128,
and 255, where the upper and lower lines represent the means associated with extreme liveness values (as labeled), and where unlabeled
stippled lines show means for the intervening liveness values. Right: Grand mean range ratings of all listeners plotted over PSFC liveness
index at volume index values of 64, 128, and 255, corresponding to -24, -12, and 0 dB.
A group of 11 listeners participated in this single listening ses-
sion experiment within a one-hour period, completing all ratings
twice, shifting to a slightly different position in the room between
sessions. Within this single, repeated listening session, the stan-
dard stimulus was presented at a ﬁxed volume and liveness for all
trials. The channel volume index for the standard stimulus was
always set to 16, corresponding to a level 24 dB below the loud-
est comparison stimulus, and the liveness for the standard stimulus
was set to the maximum value of 255. The channel volume index
values for the comparison stimuli were 16, 32, 64, 128, and 255,
covering a 24 dB range, and the liveness index values were also
16, 32, 64, 128, and 255. The number of judgments in each ses-
sion was 25, with a new randomized order of volume and liveness
for each. Unlike in the above-described close-range experiment,
the standard stimulus was not presented from the same spatial di-
rection as the comparison stimulus, but rather from the opposite
side of the room. One reason for this was to avoid a situation
in which the indirect sound pattern for the two stimuli would be
identical in both temporal and spatial distribution (switching sides
made the simulated reﬂection patterns slightly different, since the
listening position in the modeled space was slightly off center).
Also, if the standard stimulus had been presented from the same
spatial direction as the comparison stimulus, especially for such
faraway sources (the range of the standard stimulus was quite ex-
treme), some compression in the spread of responses could occur.
This could happen for two reasons. First, it has been observed that
a virtual sound source may reach no greater auditory range than
that described by an auditory horizon when the direct sound
SPL is
low [45]. But also, in the absence of strong cues to auditory range,
two stimuli will tend to be perceived at nearly the same range, es-
pecially if they are located in roughly the same spatial direction
(Gogel [46] termed this the equidistance tendency).
3.3. Results
Fig. 4 summarizes the results of this psychophysical experiment,
in which the comparison stimuli were presented in all combina-
tions of ﬁve liveness values and ﬁve volume levels. The left panel
shows the result of two replications for 11 subjects. Note that all
range ratings here are on a common subjective scale, since they are
all referenced to the same standard stimulus of ﬁxed volume and
liveness. The solid line with ﬁlled circles shows the group mean
ratings at a liveness value of 255, while the thick stippled line with
open circles shows the result at a liveness value of 16. The re-
sults for the other liveness values (32, 64, and 128) are shown by
thin stippled lines. Again the effect of volume on range ratings is
obvious, but the effect of liveness variation is more difﬁcult to rec-
ognize. Therefore, an alternative view of the same data is shown
in the graph on the right.
On the right side of Fig. 4, the group mean range ratings are
plotted over the liveness values of 16, 32, 64, 128, and 255 with
volume as the parameter of the graph and the group mean range
ratings of all listeners are plotted over
PSFC liveness. Results for
only three of the ﬁve volume index values (64, 128, and 255) are
shown, which extend over a 24 dB range. The upper line with
triangle symbols shows that the range ratings at the lowest vol-
ume levels increase with increasing liveness. The middle line with
square symbols shows the same increase at moderate volume, and
the lower line with circle symbols also has nearly the same shape.
The conclusion, that regardless of volume, increasing liveness causes
the virtual source to move to greater auditory range, was con-
ﬁrmed via
ANOV A: The main effect of volume was signiﬁcant at
: ;
 
 
 : > ?  @   A 7 
  3
 
3   , the main effect of liveness was
also signiﬁcant at
: ;
 
 
 : > ?  @   A 7 
 
  H
  , but the interac-
tion between liveness and volume was not found to be signiﬁcant:
> ? 
 3 @ 
 3  A 7 
 
4 5 4 . In effect, the effect of volume on auditory
range did not depend upon liveness.
3.4. Multiple Regression Analysis
The motivation for this psychophysical experiment was to ﬁnd the
relation between auditory range and PSFC parameters volume and
liveness. In order to generate a look-up table for the volume level
required to produce a given range rating at a given liveness value,
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-204
16 64
128
192
256 16 64
128
192
256
0
50
100
Liveness IndexVolume Index
Predicted Range
0 25 50 75 100
0
32
64
128
255Required Volume Index
Desired Range
Liveness=16
Liveness=255
Figure 5: Left: Predicted Range as a function of PSFC volume index and liveness index. Right: Required V olume Index plotted over
Desired Range for three liveness values. The two labeled curves correspond to liveness values of 16 and 255 and the unlabeled stippled
curve corresponds to a liveness value of 128.
Coefﬁcients
 95% Conf. Int.
Model
 K
 St. Err.
 Lower
 Upper
Constant
 118.127
 4.258
 109.763
 126.491
V olume
 -46.926
 1.645
 -50.157
 -43.696
Liveness
 13.532
 1.645
 10.301
 16.763
Table 2: Coefﬁcients (vector K ) of the prediction equation ﬁt by
Multiple Regression Analysis (MRA ), along with their standard er-
ror. The 95% conﬁdence intervals for each coefﬁcient (upper and
lower bounds) are also provided.
a prediction equation was ﬁrst needed for predicting the range rat-
ings. The 550 range ratings obtained from 11 listeners in this ex-
periment were submitted to Multiple Regression Analysis ( MRA ).
The two predictor variables, volume and liveness, were log trans-
formed before ﬁtting a linear equation, so as to allow the software
to ﬁt the compressive functions observed. An alternative run of
the MRA operated instead upon the log-transformed rating data,
but this did not yield as good a result. As no dependence of vol-
ume effects on liveness level was observed, a simple two-variable
prediction equation was ﬁt to the data, withL 7
  N H
3 and adjusted
L O 7
 
3 
 3 . The coefﬁcients of the “log-linearized” function are
given in Table 2.
For the range of volume values and liveness values employed
in the experiment, a 3 D mesh plot was constructed to show how
the MRA result interpolates between collected range data. The left
graph in Fig. 5 shows this mesh plot with predicted range on the
z axis. The desired look-up table values are shown in the right
plot of Fig. 5, which values are derived by inverting the predicted
auditory range function. If the user sets the
PSFC liveness index to
16 and desires a range corresponding to the position 50 percent of
the way to the maximum attainable range, the lower curve shows
that a volume index of 64 would be required. If, however, the
PSFC
user sets the liveness index to 255, a volume index of 144 would be
required to produce the same predicted auditory range. A different
situation occurs if the user desires to obtain a range of 25 percent
when the liveness is set to 255. Here, a warning message must be
issued to indicate that a range of 25 is not attainable at that liveness
(it is off the top of the graph!). Of course, if the liveness were
set to 16, then a range of 25 percent would ﬁnd a legal look-up
volume value of 207. Finally, consider what the smallest attainable
auditory range would be were the liveness set to its maximum of
255. Setting the volume to its maximum of 255 will bring the
predicted auditory range to the 38 percent point, and no closer
source is possible for a simulated space with such liveness.
4. CONCLUSION
Though auditory range can be predicted by changes in reproduced
sound source level (i.e.,
SPL of the proximal stimulus), the control
of source range when other auditory range cues are varied requires
additional knowledge of the performance of a particular spatial au-
ditory display system. In the case of the headphone-based display
of nearby sources, a simpliﬁed model of range-dependence for
simulated
HRTF s needed calibration because it was based upon a
somewhat unrealistic manipulation of ipsilateral and contralateral
SPL . In the case of “room-based” PSFC applications, no adequate
model for predicting the interaction between the channel volume
and liveness parameters was available, and so an empirical calibra-
tion approach was taken. In particular, that experiment addressed
the problem of adjusting for the inﬂuence of reverberant liveness
and overall channel volume on judgments of auditory range. This
paper taught a psychophysical calibration method employing hu-
man perceptual judgments that are ﬁrst analyzed to provide a uni-
ﬁed set of psychophysical scales for range that are reliable under
known stimulus conditions. This prediction model is then inverted
to produce a look-up table that can be used to set display parameter
values to obtain desired auditory range percepts for the displayed
virtual sources. Such look-up tables provide missing pieces of the
puzzle that must be solved in the development of an
API (Appli-
cation Programmer’s Interface) for the control of virtual source
range [47]. For the two cases examined here, this information en-
abled the deployment of an improved API for these displays, inte-
grated with the Sound Spatialization Framework [48] in use at the
University of Aizu for a range of related spatial auditory display
technologies.
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-205
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank Durand Begault for his review of
an early draft of this paper, which helped its focus and clariﬁed its
language. Thanks are also due to Michael Cohen and Jens Herder
for their comments on early drafts, and for their input throughout
the course of this project. The experimental listening subjects who
voluntarily participated also gave valuable feedback. This research
was supported in part by the Fukushima Prefectural Foundation for
the Advancement of Science and Education.
6. REFERENCES
[1] T. S. Kuhn, The Essential Tension, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL, 1979.
[2] W. L. Martens, “Uses and misuses of psychophysical meth-
ods in the evaluation of spatial sound reproduction,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 110
Q R Convention of the Audio Engineering
Society, Amsterdam, Netherlands, May 2001.
[3] Jack M. Loomis, Chick Hebert, and Joseph G. Cicinelli, “Ac-
tive localization of virtual sounds,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 1757–1763, Oct. 1990.
[4] W. C. Gogel, “The organization of perceived space,” in Indi-
rect Perception, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1997, pp. 361–
386, MIT Press.
[5] P. Zahorik and F. L. Wightman, “Loudness constancy with
varying sound distance,” Nature Neuroscience, vol. 4, pp.
78–83, 2001.
[6] K. Amano, F. Matsushita, H. Yanagawa, M. Cohen, J.
Herder, W. Martens, Y . Koba, and M. Tohyama., “A Virtual
Reality Sound System Using Room-Related Transfer Func-
tions Delivered Through a Multispeaker Array: the PSFC at
the University of Aizu Multimedia Center,” TVRSJ: Trans.
of the Virtual Reality Society of Japan, vol. 3, no. 1, Mar.
1998.
[7] P. Damaske, “Head-related two-channel stereophony with
loudspeaker reproduction,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 40,
no. 4, pp. 1109–1115, 1971.
[8] D. H. Cooper and J. L. Bauck, “Prospects for transaural
recording,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 37, pp. 29–40, 1989.
[9] D. S. Brungart and W. M. Rabinowitz, “Auditory localiza-
tion of nearby sources: Head-related transfer functions,” J.
Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 1465–1479, 1999.
[10] W. L. Martens and A. Yoshida, “Psychoacoustically-based
control of auditory range: Display of virtual sound sources
in the listener’s personal space,” in International Confer-
ence on Information Society in the 21
S Q Century: Emerging
Technologies and New Challenges (IS2000), Nov. 2000, pp.
288–294.
[11] D. R. Begault, Control of Auditory Distance, Ph.D. thesis,
University of San Diego, San Diego, CA, 1987.
[12] M. Morimoto, H. Fujimori, and Z. Maekawa, “Discrimina-
tion between auditory source width and envelopment,” J.
Acous. Soc. Japan, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 449–457, 1990, (in
Japanese).
[13] M. Morimoto and Z. Maekawa, “Auditory spaciousness
and envelopment,” in Proceedings of the 13 Q R Interna-
tional Congress on Acoustics , Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 1989,
pp. 215–218.
[14] K. Honno, W. L. Martens, and M. Cohen,
“Psychophysically-derived control of source range for
the Pioneer Sound Field Controller,” in Proceedings of
the 110
Q R Convention of the Audio Engineering Society ,
Amsterdam, Netherlands, May 2001.
[15] P. D. Coleman, “Failure to localize the source distance of an
unfamiliar sound,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
345–346, Mar. 1962.
[16] P. D. Coleman, “An analysis of cues to auditory depth per-
ception in free space,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 60, pp.
302–315, 1963.
[17] B. F. Lounsbury and R. A. Butler, “Estimation of distances
of recorded sounds presented through headphones,” Scand.
Aud., vol. 8, pp. 145–149, 1979.
[18] R. O. Duda and W. L. Martens, “Range dependence of the
response of an ideal rigid sphere,”J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol.
105, no. 5, pp. 3048–3058, 1998.
[19] D. S. Brungart, “Auditory localization of nearby sources III :
Stimulus effects,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 106, no. 8, pp.
3589–3602, 1999.
[20] B. B. Bauer, “Stereophonic earphones and binaural loud-
speakers,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 9, pp. 148–151, 1961.
[21] E. Meyer, W. Burgtorf, and P. Damaske, “Eine Apparatur
zur elektroakustischen Nachbildung von Schallfeldern. Sub-
jektive H¨ orwirkungen beim¨Ubergang Koh¨ arenz [An appa-
ratus for electroacoustical simulation of sound ﬁelds. Sub-
jective auditory effects at the transition between coherence
and incoherence,” Acustica, vol. 15, pp. 339–344, 1965, (in
German).
[22] F. R. Moore, “A general model for spatial processing of
sounds,” Computer Music Journal, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 6–15,
1983.
[23] R. Sommer, Personal Space – The Behavioral Basis of De-
sign, Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1969.
[24] A. Yoshida and W. L. Martens, “Whisper function: An audio
transformation for conveying a conﬁded speech message in
a multi-user virtual environment,” in IEICE Tohoku Branch
Conference, University of Aizu, Aug. 2000.
[25] N. I. Durlach, A. Rigpulos, X. D. Pang, W. S. Woods,
A. Kulkarni, H. S. Colburn, and E. M. Wenzel, “On the ex-
ternalization of auditory images,” Presence, vol. 1, no. 2, pp.
251–257, Spring 1992,
ISSN 1054–7460.
[26] W. M. Hartmann and A. T. Wittenberg, “On the externaliza-
tion of sound images,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 99, pp.
3678–3688, 1996.
[27] D. R. Begault, E. M. Wenzel, A. S. Lee, and M. R. Anderson,
“Direct comparison of the impact of head tracking, reverber-
ation, and individualized head-related transfer functions on
the spatial perception of a virtual speech source,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Audio Engineering Society 108
Q R Int. Conv.,
2000, Preprint 5134.
[28] F. E. Toole, “In-head localization of acoustic images,” J.
Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 48, pp. 943–949, 1969.
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-206
[29] N. Sakamoto, T. Gotoh, and Y . Kimura, “On “out-of-head
localization” in headphone listening,” J. Audio Eng. Soc.,
vol. 24, pp. 710–715, 1976.
[30] R. V . L. Hartley and T. C. Fry, “The binaural localization of
pure tones,” Physics Review, vol. 18, pp. 431–442, 1922.
[31] D. S. Brungart, “Near-ﬁeld auditory localization,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 3U V Int. Conf. on Auditory Display, Palo Alto,
CA, 1996.
[32] D. S. Brungart, “A speech-based auditory distance display,”
in Proceedings of the Audio Engineering Society 109 Q R Int.
Conv., Los Angeles, 2000.
[33] P. A. Keating and M. K. Huffman, “V owel variation in
Japanese,” Phonetica, vol. 41, pp. 311–322, 1984.
[34] W. C. Gogel and J. D. Tietz, “Absolute motion parallax and
the speciﬁc distance tendency,” Perception and Psychopy-
sics, vol. 13, pp. 284–292, 1973.
[35] N. R. Draper and H. Smith, Applied Regression Analysis ,
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1981.
[36] M. A. Gerzon, “Periphony: with-height sound reproduction,”
J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 2–10, 1973.
[37] G. S. Kendall and W. L. Martens, “Simulating the cues of
spatial hearing in natural environments,” in Proceedings of
the International Computer Music Conference , Paris, 1984,
Computer Music Association, pp. 111–126.
[38] W. L. Martens and N. Zacharov, “Multidimensional percep-
tual unfolding of spatially processed speechI: Deriving stim-
ulus space using indscal,” in Proceedings of the 109 Q R
Convention of the Audio Engineering Society , Los Angeles,
Sept. 2000, Preprint 5224.
[39] D. R. Begault, “Preferred sound intensity increase for sensa-
tion of half distance,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, vol. 72,
pp. 1019–1029, 1991.
[40] D. H. Mershon and J. N. Bowers, “Absolute and relative cues
for the auditory perception of egocentric distance,” Percep-
tion, vol. 8, pp. 311–322, 1979.
[41] J. P. Maxﬁeld and W. J. Albersheim, “An acoustic constant
of enclosed spaces with their apparent liveness,” J. Acous.
Soc. Amer., vol. 19, pp. 71–79, 1947.
[42] W. Reichardt and W. Schmidt, “Die h¨ orbaren Stufen des
Raumeindrucks bei Musik [the audible steps of spatial im-
pression in music],” Acustica, vol. 17, pp. 175–179, 1966,
(in German).
[43] R. A. Rasch and R. Plomp, “The listener and the acoustic
environment,” in The Psychology of Music, D. Deutsch, Ed.,
pp. 135–147. Academic Press, 1984, ISBN 0-12-213560-1 or
0-12-213562-8.
[44] A. Bronkhorst and T. Houtgast, “Auditory distance percep-
tion in rooms,” Nature, vol. 397, pp. 517–520, Feb. 1999.
[45] C. W. Sheeline, “An investigation of the effects of direct and
reverberant signal interaction on auditory distance percep-
tion,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Department Hearing and Speech
Sciences, Stanford University, 1984.
[46] W. C. Gogel, “Equidistance tendency and its consequences,”
Perception and Psychopysics, vol. 64, pp. 153–163, 1965.
[47] K. Honno, K. Suzuki, and J. Herder, “Distance and room ef-
fects control for the PSFC , an auditory display using a loud-
speaker array,” 3D Forum: The Journal of Three Dimen-
sional Images, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 146–151, Dec. 2000.
[48] J. Herder, “Sound spatialization framework: An audio toolkit
for virtual environments,” Journal of the 3D-Forum Society,
Japan, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 17–22, September 1998.
Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland, July 29-August 1, 2001
ICAD01-207