Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
RAPID PSYCHOPHYSICAL CALIBRATION USING BISECTION SCALING
FOR INDIVIDUALIZED CONTROL OF SOURCE ELEVATION IN AUDITORY DISPLAY
William L. Martens
Multimedia Systems Lab.
University of Aizu
Aizu-Wakamatsu 965-8580, Japan
wlm@u-aizu.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
In an effort to reduce problems stemming from individual differ-
ences in spatial hearing, a rapid method for customizing an interac-
tive spatial auditory display for individual users was developed and
tested. This paper describes how new users of a DSP-based spatial
auditory display system perform a short series of psychophysical
calibration tasks via realtime manipulation of the elevation of a
virtual sound source removed from the median plane by a constant
angle (on a “cone of confusion” centered on the interaural axis).
The user ﬁrst produces ﬁve settings indicating the point at which
the perceived elevation of a virtual source matches their own in-
ternal standard for “ear-level” incidence. The median of these set-
tings provides an anchoring stimulus for creating an individualized
psychophysical scale for controlling source elevation as perceived
by the user of the display system. The experimentally-derived an-
choring stimulus is regarded as the origin for an angular bisec-
tion session that enables the rapid construction of a look up table
(LUT) for the full range of elevations produced by the display for
each individual user. In contrast to systems that base source ele-
vation control upon individualized head-related transfer functions
(HRTFs), the tested system uses a generic set of HRTFs, and ma-
nipulates only the values in the LUT for the elevations produced
by each HRTF. The method does not attempt to ﬁnd for each in-
dividual listener a single best frequency scaling for the generic set
of HRTFs, but attempts to map the useful range of elevations pro-
duced by them. Though such a LUT for perceived elevation can be
based upon angular estimates made for virtual sources created us-
ing each of many HRTFs, the bisection task presented here requires
users to complete only a short listening session in which they ad-
just the elevation of a comparison stimulus to bisect the angle sub-
tended by a pair of reference stimuli. In contrast to other rapid
methods of customization, such as those based upon a user’s sub-
jective preferences, the current method is based upon active spatial
manipulation of a virtual source. The adjustments are referenced
to the user’s internal standard for “ear-level” incidence, which is
tangibly deﬁned and quite easily explained to new users.
1. INTRODUCTION
Spatial auditory display systems typically rely on measured head-
related transfer functions (HRTFs) to place virtual sound sources at
desired positions in the space surrounding the system user. Due
to differences that exist between HRTFs for different individuals,
sound processing employing HRTFs measured for the individual
user are often regarded as critical to the success of headphone-
based applications requiring high accuracy in the spatial position-
ing of virtual sound sources; and this is especially true for display
systems intended to distinguish front from rear, and up from down
[1]. But individual differences in HRTFs are only one potential
source of variation in the performance of spatial auditory display
systems; there may also be variations due to individual differences
in spatial perception and cognition. It is well established that indi-
viduals often differ in their abilities to perceive various attributes
of sensory stimulation, including their abilities to notice similari-
ties and differences between stimuli:
It is difﬁcult – perhaps impossible – to ﬁnd any
domain or aspect of human responsiveness and per-
formance in which individual differences are so small
as to be negligible. (Carroll [2], p. 1).
So an important challenge in the optimal deployment of HRTF-
based spatial auditory display systems is to identify the determi-
nants of signiﬁcant variation between individuals, and to deter-
mine how best to reduce problems associated with this variation.
Personalized headphone-based display systems are likely to be-
come more and more common, especially with current advances in
mobile telephone technology [3]. For applications requiring high
accuracy in spatial positioning of virtual sound sources, properly
equalized headphone reproduction of individualized HRTFs (i.e.,
HRTFs measured for the intended user’s own ears) is probably the
approach that engenders the most conﬁdence in success. However,
listeners using their own ears will not necessarily localize sounds
accurately [4], and so perfectly accurate reproduction of binau-
ral signals does not guarantee perfectly accurate source localiza-
tion. It is also the case that most spatial auditory display systems
do not provide the option of employing individualized HRTFs, but
rather employ a single standard set of HRTFs that has been cho-
sen according to a range of criteria (sometimes vaguely speciﬁed).
Such systems can beneﬁt from customizing the deployment of a
set of generic HRTFs to the individual user via frequency scaling
of those HRTFs, as shown in [5]. Such frequency scaling of non-
individualized HRTFs has been shown to improve virtual source
localization accuracy, most likely by minimizing the mismatch be-
tween spectral features existing in the listener’s own HRTFs and
the spectral features existing in the generic set [6].
There has long been a debate about whether listeners localize
best using their own HRTFs or using some other subject’s HRTFs
that exhibit more systematic spectral variation as a sound source
moves through space (see Butler, et al. [7] and Morimoto, et al.
[8] for the beginnings of this debate, continuing now for more
than 30 years). The issues underlying this debate can be clariﬁed
somewhat by recognizing two component arguments that poten-
tially may be confused. First, there is the issue of individualiza-
ICAD02-1
Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
tion, which is most often associated with properly equalized head-
phone reproduction of the individual’s own HRTFs; second, their is
the issue of customization, which has come to be associated with
the adjustment for individual use of any set of transfer functions,
whether they are measured HRTFs [6], or synthesized HRTFs, con-
structed from either analysis and resynthesis of measured HRTFs
[9] or from some structural model [10]. The methods presented in
this paper address the latter issue by implementing a psychophysi-
cal calibration scheme designed for rapid completion by new users
of any spatial auditory display system.
In the customization of HRTF datasets for individual listeners
[6], three types of calibration have been identiﬁed:
1. Anthropometric calibration (based on human anatomy)
2. Acoustical calibration (based on binaural signals)
3. Psychophysical calibration (based on binaural perception)
A psychophysical calibration scheme presented by Middle-
brooks, et al. [5] was based upon the assumption that there exists
for each individual listener a single best frequency scaling for all
HRTF measurements collected from another single subject (possi-
bly a dummy-head system such as the historically popular source
of HRTF data, KEMAR [11], the Knowles Electronics Manikin for
Acoustic Research). This assumption has its foundation in over-
all summary statistics calculated for many source locations, but
the assumption may not lead to the best HRTF scaling for speciﬁc
virtual source locations. An alternative psychophysical calibration
scheme is presented here that was designed to ﬁnd the best HRTF
for a number of key virtual source locations. It will be shown that
the choices listeners make are inconsistent with the assumption of
a single best frequency scaling for each individual listener.
2. METHODS
2.1. Stimulus Preparation Using Measured HRTFs
In this preliminary study of calibration of virtual source elevation,
a set of measured HRTFs used in popular sound spatialization soft-
ware was employed.1 The 72 HRTFs employed in the current study
were collected at 5
 
steps in interaural-polar (IP) elevation, but at
a ﬁxed IP azimuth angle of 50
 
(see Fig. 1). These HRTFs have
been used in a number of other psychophysical calibration studies
[13] [14], and their adequacy in creating useful variation in spatial
auditory imagery has been generally conﬁrmed. The magnitude
responses of the ipsilateral HRTFs from this dataset are shown in
Fig. 2. Each vertical strip in the image corresponds to an HRTF at
the angle speciﬁed on the x-axis.
One obvious visual feature in the set of curves in Fig. 2 is
the relatively deep notch that appears to migrate in frequency with
changes in source elevation (identiﬁed as antiresonance

in [15]).
Typically, this primary notch in HRTF magnitude migrates from
lower frequencies for sources located below ear level toward higher
1The HRTF dataset employed was a high spatial resolution su-
perset of the author’s measurements made for one of the ﬁve hu-
man subjects chosen by Intel Corp. for use in their 3D-RSX soft-
ware for sound spatialization. These data have been made available
for non-commercial use via the following website: http://www.u-
aizu.ac.jp/  wlm/data/intel/. The data comprise blocked-
meatus, probe-tube measurements that did not use minimum-phase recon-
struction of impulse responses, but rather left phase response intact for
those spatial regions where the HRTFs exhibited non-minimum-phase be-
havior.
Front
0
Above
45
90135
180
Figure 1: Illustration of the interaural-polar (IP) spherical coordi-
nate system used in this paper to specify sound source directions
on sagittal planes (i.e., on circles centered on the interaural axis,
intersecting “cones of confusion”). This system was probably ﬁrst
introduced by Morimoto, et al. [12], and though not as often used
as the vertical-polar (VP) spherical coordinate system, has certain
advantages both in explaining errors in directional judgment [12],
and in describing sets of HRTF measurements (as in [10]). In this
ﬁgure, the dark circle centered on the interaural axis intersects a
“cone of confusion” deﬁned at a constant IP azimuth angle, de-
scribing all sources displaced 50
 
from the median plane. The IP
elevation angles in the upper hemiﬁeld are labeled at 45
 
intervals,
and vary around this circle starting at 0
 
for a source arriving from
a frontal location at ear level. The angle increases to 90
 
for a
source arriving from the highest point on the circle, and reaches
180
 
for ear-level incidence from the rear. The spherical coordi-
nate system is viewed here from a 45
 
IP azimuth angle and a 20
 
IP elevation angle. More explanation of IP coordinates may help
the unfamiliar reader at this point: Besides the usual radial coor-
dinate corresponding to source range, this coordinate system in-
cludes an azimuth and an elevation angle, but contrary to the more
conventional VP spherical coordinate system, the IP coordinates
deﬁne individual saggital planes parallel to the median plane using
the IP azimuth angle. All measurements used in the current study
were made on a sphere of radius 1.5 m, and at an IP azimuth an-
gle of 50
 
. Holding these two coordinates constant while varying
a third angular coordinate deﬁnes the circle shown in the graphic,
lying in a saggital plane that is displaced 50
 
relative to the me-
dian plane, which is shown in the ﬁgure as the dark vertical sheet
that contains the points directly above and in front of the subject.
Source locations within the upper half plane of the circle are la-
beled by their IP elevation angles, from 0
 
to 180
 
; and locations
on the horizontal plane (shown in the ﬁgure as the lighter sheet) are
speciﬁed either by a 0
 
IP elevation angle for the anterior portion,
or by a 180
 
IP elevation angle for the posterior portion.
ICAD02-2
Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
270 180 90 0 −90 
Frequency (kHz)
Elevation (deg)
20
15
10
 5
.1
Figure 2: Image constructed from the magnitude response of 72
HRTFs, all measured at constant lateral angle, and varying in ele-
vation in 5
 
steps. The elevation angle labels the vertical grid lines
for cardinal directions (below is -90
 
, front is 0
 
above is 90
 
, rear
is 180
 
, and 270
 
wraps the plot back to the initial -90
 
angle). A
conventional gray-scale colormap was employed with black cod-
ing minimum HRTF gain
frequencies for sources arriving from above. The HRTFs employed
in this study showed notches at roughly the same frequencies as
those typically observed [15]. For frontal incidence, the ﬁrst pri-
mary notch occurs at around 8 kHz, while for rearward incidence,
the notch occurs at around 10 kHz. There is a great deal of ev-
idence that migration of notches in frequency is associated with
variation in perceived source elevation (see, for example [16] [7]
[17] [18]), yet it is also expected that listeners will base eleva-
tion judgments upon spectral cues associated with variation in their
own HRTFs [19]. Furthermore, for the lateralized incidence angles
of the virtual sources presented in this study it has been estab-
lished that spectral cues to source elevation exist at frequencies
lower than 5 kHz [20]. Despite the great deal of research that has
been done on the basis of elevation perception in the acoustical
signals presented to the ears, the existence of signiﬁcant individ-
ual differences have made it difﬁcult to develop a robust predic-
tion model for the performance of any given spatial auditory dis-
play system with regard to elevation perception. Sufﬁce it to say
that individually-oriented calibration is needed, and so for the pur-
poses of evaluating the calibration methods proposed here, a stan-
dard approach to directional manipulation was adopted based upon
measured human HRTFs.
Preparation of the HRTF data for convolution with the experi-
mental sound source entailed some special treatment. The interau-
ral time difference (ITD) present in the original measurements was
removed from each ipsilateral and contralateral pair of HRTFs, and
then a constant ITD was re-introduced so that the degree of lateral-
ization would be relatively constant for the sequence. In this way,
virtual source elevation should be modulated only by the spectral
variation between the 72 pairs of HRTFs. In a preliminary expo-
sure to the nature of the spatial auditory imagery created by the
system under test, headphone listeners were presented with two
sets of stimuli synthesized using these HRTFs. Always the well-
lateralized sources progressed around a cone of confusion from
lower-elevation HRTFs to higher-elevation HRTFs (always at a  
 
IP azimuth angle). Whether the sources were intended to move
through the frontward or the rearward hemiﬁeld, listeners reported
a relatively smooth increase in perceived elevation of the virtual
sound source. Furthermore, all listeners reported that the ﬁrst stim-
ulus in the presented sequence seemed to arrive from a location
below ear level, and the last stimulus in the sequence reached a lo-
cation well above ear level. Note, however, that despite the use of
HRTFs measured for frontal incidence angles, several listeners re-
ported difﬁculty perceiving a substantial frontward shift for these
stimuli when compared to the those processed using HRTFs from
the rearward hemiﬁeld.
2.2. Bisection Scaling
Reports of bisection scaling may be found as early as 1872, in
Plateau’s [21] search for the lightness of a gray stimulus midway
between black and white. If bisections are made for more than one
pair of end points, then the result may be termed an equisection
scaling, such as the scaling using eight equal steps that was con-
structed for the lightness of grays by Munsell, et al. [22]. As op-
posed to psychophysical scaling methods based upon magnitude
estimation for a given set of stimuli varying along some percep-
tual dimension, the bisection and equisection scaling methods are
examples of magnitude production, in which the subject is given
control over an adjustable stimulus, and must produce speciﬁed
differences in perception. The listener’s task in this study was to
produce, via adjustment of a variable-elevation comparison stimu-
lus, an elevation percept that was midway between two reference
stimuli. In effect, the listener was to bisect the angle subtended
by the reference stimuli, which were intended to differ primarily
in terms of their elevation (though some variation in perceived vir-
tual source azimuth angle might be experienced).
Before bisecting elevation angles using two ﬁxed standards
and a variable comparison, all listeners ﬁrst bisected the 180
 
an-
gle subtended by two imaginary points, one directly over head, the
other directly under the listener’s feet.2 For this ﬁrst listening ses-
sion, the HRTF-processed sound source was a staccato trombone
tone, with attack and decay amplitude slightly shaped to make the
duration 100 ms. This short sound stimulus was convolved with
the ipsilateral and contralateral pairs of HRTFs measured at IP 72
elevation angles and at a  
 
IP azimuth angle to create a sequence
of virtual sources that were heard to vary progressively in eleva-
tion angle (conﬁrmed unanimously by all listeners upon initial ex-
posure).
For subsequent bisection scaling sessions, three short trumpet
tones of differing pitch were processed (the musical notes being
G, C, and E). The sound source that was processed by an HRTF
pair measured at the lowest elevation of the three was always pre-
sented at the lowest pitch (G); the highest-elevation sound source
was always presented at the highest pitch (E). These two extreme-
elevation stimuli were presented as ﬁxed-elevation standard stim-
2In an initial evaluation, the elevation adjustment sessions were fol-
lowed by a more intensive psychophysical investigation of elevation using
the method of constant stimuli. The goal here was to conﬁrm that the rapid
adjustment sessions produced reliable and valid estimates of psychometric
functions near the “ear-level” response, the target of the initial adjustment.
ICAD02-3
Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
Figure 3: The graphical user interface (GUI) that was used for the
listener’s interactive control of stimulus elevation in the adjustment
task. Though this image of the window was grabbed from the
SGI workstation on which the task was performed, it appears only
slightly different when the Matlab-based GUI is displayed on a PC.
Note that the title bar reminds the listener of the meaning of the
button labels “Lower” and “Higher,” and so is speciﬁc to the task
requiring adjustment to “ear-level” incidence. For the elevation
matching task, the title bar displayed the fragment “to match ﬁrst,
make second...”
uli, and a third stimulus of variable elevation was presented in the
temporal interval between the two standard stimuli, and at a pitch
(C) in between the pitches of the standard stimuli. As higher-
pitched sources suggest incidence at higher elevation angles, it was
hoped that the pitch variation would create a bias that would aid in-
experienced listeners in quickly understanding the bisection task.
Of course, only the elevation of the comparison stimulus could be
adjusted by the listener, and not its pitch, so the function of the bias
was primarily to remind the listener that virtual source elevation
angle was intended to be increasing from standard, to comparison,
to standard. The experimental sessions included several varieties
of the general bisection method, but a few additional procedures
were completed as well during the development of the calibration
tasks proposed here. The speciﬁc details of all the procedures em-
ployed in the current study are not described in this methods sec-
tion, but rather are presented along with results in section 3.
2.3. Subjects
In addition to the subject whose measured HRTFs were used in
stimulus preparation, 25 students (both graduate and undergradu-
ate) at the University of Aizu served as listeners in the experiments.
All reported normal hearing, but were not audiologically screened.
The students had no previous training as subjects in experiments
on human spatial hearing, but a few had participated in one previ-
ous perceptual study of musical timbre.
3. CALIBRATION TASKS AND RESULTS
This section reports on the results of preliminary user testing with
only 25 listeners, but also explains the tasks that the listeners were
required to complete in the various experimental sessions. Addi-
tional tasks were completed by one subject to provide a deeper
check of the reliability and validity of the bisection scaling meth-
ods employed in the calibration tasks presented here. An addi-
tional detail that allowed for a validity check using this one subject
was that this subject was listening through his “own ears” (i.e., this
was the subject whose measured HRTFs were used to vary the ap-
parent elevation of the stimuli). It is most informative to begin with
an examination of the performance of this special-case listener.
3.1. Adjustment to “Ear-Level” for One Listener
The ﬁrst task that was required of listeners in order to begin to do
elevation calibration for the spatial auditory display system under
examination was the adjustment of stimulus elevation to each lis-
tener’s internal standard for “ear-level” incidence. Listeners heard
a warning announcement that the task was about to begin, and then
the ﬁrst stimulus was presented at an elevation randomly selected
within a frontward or rearward hemiﬁeld from one of 37 possible
nominal elevation angles ranging from the lowest to the highest
measured HRTF elevation angles. The task was to respond whether
the elevation of the virtual sound source needed to be higher or
lower in order to move it toward “ear-level.” The response was
indicated via interaction with the graphical user interface (GUI)
depicted in Fig. 3. If a listener judged the source too low, then
that choice was indicated by clicking the appropriate button (i.e.,
the completed statement made on the GUI was “To reach ear level,
make source . . .Higher”). A single staircase tracked the 50%
point for judging the stimulus higher than “ear-level.” If a listener
was unsure how to respond, the stimulus could be heard again by
clicking on the “Replay” button. When listeners were satisﬁed
that the stimulus had reached “ear-level,” the next staircase could
be initiated by clicking on the “Next” button. After listeners com-
pleted ﬁve such staircase runs, an ending message was presented
and the GUI was removed. The median of the ending points of
the ﬁve runs was taken as the estimate of the stimulus closest to
“ear-level.”
Whereas this adjustment task was completed by all listeners in
the manner just described, the “own-ear” listener also participated
in a much longer experimental session in which the method of con-
stant stimuli was employed, rather than adjustment of the stimulus
to the constant “ear-level” response. The primary difference be-
tween these two methods is that in the constant stimuli session the
listener has no control over which stimulus will be presented next.
Otherwise, the two tasks are practically the same, since an identi-
cal judgment needed to be made on each trial for each task. Many
more constant stimulus trials were completed in order to provide
the best estimate of the probabilities of making one response or
the other. This alternative method was employed in order to as-
sess the validity of the less time consuming method of adjustment.
The psychometric curves resulting from both methods, and for two
spatial regions, are shown in Fig. 4.
The upper panel of Fig. 4 shows the percentage of “Higher”re-
sponses that listeners made when the virtual sound source arrived
at a frontal incidence angle (consistent with the 50
 
IP azimuth
angle of HRTF measurement). The ﬁlled symbols (with dashed
connecting lines) correspond to the percentage of the adjustment
ICAD02-4
Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
−10 −5 0 5 10
0
25
50
75
100
FRONT
Percent ’Higher’ Response
−10 −5 0 5 10
0
25
50
75
100
REAR
HRTF Measurement Elevation
Percent ’Higher’ Response
Figure 4: Comparison of the percentage of “Higher”responses ob-
tained using two psychophysical methods, and for virtual sources
located in two spatial regions (FRONT vs. REAR). In both upper
and lower panels, open symbols (with solid connecting lines) cor-
respond to results obtained using the method of constant stimuli,
while ﬁlled symbols (with dashed connecting lines) correspond to
results obtained when the subject was asked to adjust source eleva-
tion to match ear level (i.e., the method of constant response). Note
that the missing datapoint for the -10
 
HRTF in the lower panel
corresponds to a constant response category in which the stimulus
happened to be presented on less than 5 trials, and was therefore
regarded as providing a poor estimate of response probability.
trials on which listeners actively increased source elevation to at-
tempt to bring it to ear level. The open symbols (with solid con-
necting lines) correspond to the percentage of “Higher” responses
given when listeners had no control over source elevation, but were
rather presented with a source at an elevation chosen randomly
by the computer within a range of 20
 
. The range of source el-
evations presented was determined by the previously completed
adjustment session for each listener. Although the percentages ob-
tained using the method of constant response (adjustment) were
based upon only a few trials (typically around 10 trials per ele-
vation angle), they estimate well the psychometric function based
upon the method of constant stimuli with 50 trials per elevation an-
gle. Note that for this listener, the stimulus processed by an HRTF
measured at 0
 
elevation corresponded well to the 50% point on
the psychometric function, meaning that the internal standard for
“ear-level” matched the externally-deﬁned horizontal plane refer-
ence.
The lower panel of Fig. 4 shows the analogous result for vir-
tual sound source arriving from the rear (again, consistent with the
rearward angle of HRTF measurement). The match is not quite as
good in the rear hemiﬁeld, as the results obtained using the method
of constant stimuli show a 50% point that is shifted to a slightly
higher elevation. This result underscores an important difference
between constant stimuli and constant response methods, revealing
a potential advantage of the constant response method. The shift
of the psychometric function in the constant stimuli case appears
to be due to above/below reversals rather than an actual small shift
in perceived elevation. These reversals are not as common when
the listener is allowed to adjust source elevation actively, and so a
natural conclusion here might be that a perceptual “hysteresis” ef-
fect is operating to keep elevation unambiguous in the adjustment
task, avoiding above/below reversals that could bias the estimate
of the 50% point in the constant stimulus case.
3.2. Adjustment to “Ear-Level” for 25 Listeners
Each listener completed the calibration procedure within a 10 minute
period. All 25 listeners produced adjustment data that were con-
sistent within subject, though the stimulus associated with “ear-
level” response differed between subjects as expected (since no
customizing was performed, such as frequency scaling [5]). In
fact, quite extreme variation was observed between subjects re-
garding which HRTF-processed stimulus was selected as the best
choice for an “ear-level” response. Fig. 5 reveals that the measure-
ment angles of selected HRTFs ranged from  


 
to  
 
eleva-
tion. Although the most common response for both frontward and
rearward incidence was that corresponding to the 
 
measurement
angle, three out of 25 listeners chose the stimulus processed by
the frontal HRTF that was measured at  


 
IP elevation. Bear-
ing in mind that these directions are lateralized from the median
plane at  
 
IP azimuth, and therefore these IP elevation angles
are not as extreme as their corresponding VP elevation angles3,
there still is perhaps a surprising amount of variation. The vari-
ation greatly exceeds the between subject variation in frequency
scaling reported by Middlebrooks, et al. [5]. A reasonable con-
clusion might be that there are signiﬁcant individual differences
in where listeners imagine their own “ear level” must be located
when projected to a location outside the head. Nonetheless, there
3The 
 
maximum IP elevation angle at a 
 
IP azimuth corresponds
to a VP elevation angle of only 
 
.
ICAD02-5
Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−60 −45 −30 −15 0 15 30
REAR
HRTF Measurement Elevation
FRONT
’Ear−Level’ Selection Frequency
Figure 5: Histogram of “ear-level” selection frequencies for 25
listeners plotted for groups of HRTFs spaced at 15
 
in elevation
measurement angles, comparing results for frontward (black bars)
vs. rearward (white bars) spatial regions.
is certainly a concern about reliability of these judgments and va-
lidity of these estimates of “ear-level” when listeners employ an
internally-deﬁned standard of reference. Therefore, an additional
check was made on the results for ﬁve of the 25 listeners using
an alternative task. The alternative task used an externally-deﬁned
standard, rather than asking the listener to imagine an internal ref-
erence level while listening to a single stimulus.
3.3. Matching Frontward to Rearward “Ear-Level” Stimuli
Each of ﬁve listeners completed an elevation matching task within
a 3 minute period. On each trial two stimuli were presented: First,
a ﬁxed-elevation standard stimulus was presented at the rearward
direction that each listener indicated in previous sessions was clos-
est to “ear-level.” The second stimulus was presented at a selected
elevation from a frontward direction, and the listener had to indi-
cate whether it seemed to be higher or lower in elevation than the
rearward standard stimulus. Just as in the previous single-stimulus
adjustment task, ﬁve such runs were completed. The median end-
ing points of the ﬁve runs was taken as the estimate of the stimulus
that matched best the elevation of the standard stimulus.
Results conﬁrmed the validity of the previous estimates, in that
all ﬁve listeners produced nearly the same median when matching
frontward to rearward stimuli as when judging frontward elevation
in isolation. It should be noted as well that matching to an external
standard was reported to be easier by all listeners than matching to
an internal standard had been. Furthermore, the runs took less time
and required fewer trials to complete (a single “ear-level” stimu-
lus adjustment run required an average of around 19 trials, while
the matching task required an average of only around 17 trials).
It was concluded that the best approach for the elevation calibra-
tion procedure proposed here would be to always ﬁrst complete a
single-stimulus adjustment task (rearward incidence was preferred
for this initial task), and then follow that with an elevation match-
ing task (with the rearward virtual source as the standard stimulus).
0 45 90
 
 
 Apparent Elevation
HRTF Measurement Elevation (IP)
Ear−Level
Bisection Angle
Maximum Apparent Elevation
Figure 6: Look up function constructed from the bisection scaling
results for one listener. The three circular symbols mark the angles
at which HRTFs were measured that produced three apparent ele-
vations which are plotted here as a function of HRTF measurement
elevation (speciﬁed in interaural-polar coordinates). The solid line
plots a curve from values of the calculated LUT for elevation.
3.4. Bisection Scaling of Elevation in the Upper Hemiﬁeld
Each of ﬁve listeners completed a bisection scaling task in which
their own selected rearward stimulus provided the lower of two
standard stimuli (i.e., this standard was presented at the rearward
direction that each listener indicated in previous sessions was clos-
est to “ear-level”). The second standard stimulus was presented at
an IP elevation of 90
 
and an IP azimuth of 50
 
(the topmost point
on the cone of confusion at this degree of lateralization). A vari-
able comparison stimulus was presented during the temporal in-
terval between the two standard stimuli, and at an HRTF measure-
ment elevation that was between that of the two standard stimuli.
The listener always heard the lower-elevation standard ﬁrst. The
task was to adjust the elevation of the comparison stimulus until it
seemed to lie midway between the elevations of the two reference
stimuli.
Fig. 6 shows bisection scaling results for one listener, and also
displays a smooth, curvilinear function for ﬁnding the measure-
ment angle of the appropriate HRTF for producing a desired appar-
ent elevation. The stimulus that was judged closest to “ear-level”
for the listener was that produced by the 0
 
HRTF measurement
elevation, and the HRTF that was selected as that producing an ap-
parent elevation midway between this lower reference point and
maximum apparent elevation was the HRTF measured at 35
 
IP el-
evation. These preliminary results suggest that the median setting
obtained listeners can be used to create an effective look up table
(LUT) for the full range of upper-hemiﬁeld elevations produced by
the display for each individual user, as discussed below.
3.5. Constructing a LUT for Virtual Source Elevation
Though only 25 listeners have participated in this preliminary study,
and only 5 listeners have completed all the tasks that might be re-
garded as required for proper calibration of displayed elevation, a
suggested application of the results can be offered with some con-
ICAD02-6
Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
ﬁdence. The application is to base the means of HRTF deployment
on data that can be collected in roughly ten minutes from listeners
who receive minimal instruction.
From only two “ear-level” adjustments, and a single bisection
adjustment, a LUT for HRTF selection and interpolation could be
constructed. The solid line shows a 2 

order polynomial ﬁt to the
three points, providing a smooth look up function for controlling
HRTF selection and interpolation. What should be noticed here
is the relative compression of the apparent elevation function at
higher elevations. This compression in the function is due to the
fact that only 7 of the 19 upper-hemiﬁeld HRTFs are used below
the elevation bisection angle, while 12 are used above that an-
gle. This implementation is inconsistent with the assumption of
a single best frequency scaling for an individual listener, since that
would be represented as a simple change in slope of the look up
function. What is captured using bisection is only slightly more
complex, but very useful, since it effectively splits into two equal
portions the perceived angular subtense spanning from “ear-level”
incidence to the maximum elevation observed for that individual
listener.
It might be asked whether such an approach is the natural ap-
proach, since it equalizes the spatial subtense of two regions that
might normally and naturally be perceived as unequal. The argu-
ment might be made that equalization of angular subtense would
degrade elevation discrimination performance where it is most needed,
for virtual sources localized just above “ear-level,” since fewer
HRTFs would be used below the elevation bisection angle. If an
application calls for very few sources to be localized above the el-
evation bisection angle, then maintaining discriminability for the
highest elevation angles is not useful. Conversely applications ex-
pected to use the full range of variation in IP elevation within the
upper hemiﬁeld will beneﬁt. Sufﬁce it to say that sensitivity to
application requirements must always be maintained.
4. CONCLUSION
In contrast to a time-consuming comprehensive angular estimation
session, requiring multiple angular estimates for stimuli created
using each of many HRTFs, the bisection task presented here re-
quires only an indication of which comparison stimulus produces
an elevation midway between the elevations of a pair of reference
stimuli (either actual or imaginal). The question addressed here
was not whether a listener can accurately report actual source in-
cidence angles, but rather focussed upon which stimulus presented
via earphones was associated with an experience of an externalized
spatial auditory image located at a particular angle, such as the 0
 
elevation angle termed “ear level.” Preliminary results show that
listeners are able to complete the calibration task quickly and with
only a few instructions. Also, the relative compression of the ap-
parent elevation function at high elevations compared to low eleva-
tions is inconsistent with the assumption of a single best frequency
scaling for each individual listener.
5. REFERENCES
[1] B. G. Shinn-Cunningham, “Spatial auditory displays,” in
International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human Fac-
tors, W. Karwowski, Ed. Taylor and Francis, Ltd., Atlanta,
GA, (in press).
[2] J. B. Carroll, “1: Studying individual differences in cognitive
abilities: Though and beyond factor analysis,” in Individ-
ual differences in cognition, R. F. Dillon and R. R. Schmeck,
Eds., vol. 1, pp. 1–33. Academic Press, Inc., 1983.
[3] W. L. Martens and A. Yoshida, “Augmenting spoken
telecommunication via spatial audio transformation,” The
Journal of Three Dimensional Images, vol. 14, no. 4, pp.
169–175, 2000.
[4] S. R. Oldﬁeld and S. P. A. Parker, “Acuity of sound local-
isation: a topography of auditory space I. Normal hearing
conditions,” Perception, vol. 13, pp. 601–617, 1984.
[5] J. C. Middlebrooks, E. A. Macpherson, and Z. A. Onsan,
“Psychophysical customization of directional transfer func-
tions for virtual sound localization,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 108, pp. 3088–3091, 2000.
[6] J. C. Middlebrooks, “Virtual localization improved by scal-
ing non-individualized external-ear transfer functions in fre-
quency,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 106, pp. 1493–1510,
1999.
[7] R. A. Butler and K. Belendiuk, “Spectral cues utilized in the
localization of sound in the median sagittal plane,” J. Acous.
Soc. Amer., vol. 61, pp. 1264–1269, 1977.
[8] M. Morimoto and Y. Ando, “On the simulation of sound
localization,” J. Acous. Soc. Japan (E), vol. 1, pp. 167–174,
1980.
[9] W. L. Martens, “Principal components analysis and resyn-
thesis of spectral cues to perceived direction,” in Proc. Int.
Computer Music Conf., Champaine-Urbana, IL, Sept. 1987.
[10] V. R. Algazi, C. Avendano, and R. O. Duda, “Elevation local-
ization and head-related transfer function analysis at low fre-
quencies,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 1110–
1122, 1999.
[11] M. D. Burkhard and R. M. Sachs, “Anthropometric manikin
for acoustic research,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 58, pp.
214–222, 1975.
[12] M. Morimoto and H. Aokata, “Localization cues of sound
sources in the upper hemisphere,” J. Acous. Soc. Japan (E),
vol. 5, pp. 236–240, 1984.
[13] W. L. Martens, “Psychophysical calibration for controlling
the range of a virtual sound source: Multidimensional com-
plexity in spatial auditory display,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Au-
ditory Display, Espoo, Finland, 2001, ICAD, pp. 197–207.
[14] W. L. Martens and N. Zacharov, “Multidimensional percep-
tual unfolding of spatially processed speech I: Deriving stim-
ulus space using INDSCAL,” in Proc. 109

Conv. of the Au-
dio Engineering Society, Los Angeles, Sept. 2000, Preprint
5224.
[15] E. A. G. Shaw and R. Teranishi, “Sound pressure generated
in an external-ear replica and real human ears by a nearby
point-source,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 44, pp. 240–249,
1968.
[16] P. J. Bloom, “Creating source elevation illusions by spectral
manipulation,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 25, pp. 560–565,
1977.
[17] J. H. Hebrank and D. Wright, “Spectral cues utilized in the
localization of sound on the median plane,” J. Acous. Soc.
Amer., vol. 56, pp. 1829–1834, 1975.
ICAD02-7
Proceedings of the 2002 International Conference on Auditory Display, Kyoto, Japan, July 2-5, 2002
[18] A. J. Watkins, “Psychoacoustic aspects of synthesized ver-
tical locale cues,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 63, pp. 1152–
1165, 1978.
[19] J. C. Middlebrooks, “Narrowband sound localization related
to acoustical cues,” J. Acous. Soc. Amer., vol. 92, pp. 2607–
2624, 1992.
[20] W. L. Martens, Directional hearing on the frontal plane:
Necessary and sufﬁcient spectral cues, Ph.D. thesis, North-
western University, Evanston, Illinois, 1991.
[21] J. A. F. Plateau, “Sur la mesure des sensations physiques,
et sur la loi qui lie l’intensie’de ces sensations a‘l’intensie’
de la cause excitante [On the measure of physical sensations,
and on the law binding the intensity of these sensations with
the intensity of their causal excitations],” Bulletins de l’
Academie Royale des Sciences, des Lettres, et des Beaux-
Arts de Belgique, vol. 33, pp. 376–388, 1872.
[22] A. E. Munsell, L. L. Sloan, and I. H. Godlove, “Neutral value
scales: I. Munsell neutral value scale,” J. Optic. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 23, pp. 394–411, 1933.
ICAD02-8