Reprinted from THE JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF hIERICA, Vol. 33, No. 12, 17251736, December, 1961 
Copyright, 1961 by the Acoustical Society of America. 
Printed in U. S. A. 
Reduction of Speech Spectra by Analysis-by-Synthesis Techniques 
C. G. BELL,* H. FUJISAKI,~ J. M. HEINZ, K. N. STEVENS, AND A. S. HOUSE 
Research Laboratory of Bectronics, Massachwetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massackusetts 
(Received September 6, 1961) 
Procedures are described for reducing the speech wave to a specification in terms of the time-varying 
vocal-tract resonances and source characteristics. The basic method, which has been called analysis by 
synthesis, involves the comparison of speech spectra with a series of spectra that are synthesized within 
the analyzer. Each comparison spectrum is generated according to a set of rules based on an acoustical 
theory of speech production. The result of the analysis of each input spectrum is a set of parameters that 
describes the synthesized spectrum providing the best match. In one version of the method convergence, 
towards the best match is controlled by the esperimenler; in another version convergence to a match is ac- 
complished automatically without the intervention of the experimenter. L%ll the operations have been 
programmed on a general-purpose digital computer and have been applied to the analysis of vowels and 
some consonants. The advantages of the analysis techniques are discussed. 
T HE problem of representing speech events in 
terms of low-information-rate signals that de- 
scribe the essential features of the speech wave is one 
of the central problems in the area of speech communi- 
cation. To the student of phonemics and phonetics it 
is important to be able to describe in a simple way the 
acoustical features associated with the various allo- 
phones of the phonemes. For the engineer concerned 
with problems of communication, an efficient descrip- 
tion of speech signals is needed for the development of 
systems for speech bandwidth compression and for the 
realization of procedures for machine recognition and 
generation of speech. 
The development of the sound spectrograph’ repre- 
sented a significant contribution to speech analysis, 
since it displays the speech events in a way that brings 
into clear focus certain of the essential features of the 
signal such as the formant movements. The three- 
dimensional intensity-frequency-time representation, 
together with the procedure for displaying spectral sec- 
tions, provides a means for isolating significant features 
for certain classes of sounds, although the techniques 
are less successful for other classes, particularly certain 
types of consonants. 
During the past few years, there have been two 
developments which suggest that it is now possible to 
bring more powerful techniques to bear on problems of 
speech analysis. The first has been the significant ad- 
vance that has occurred in our understanding of the 
acoustics of speech production. The second has been 
the increasing availability of high-speed digital com- 
puters for applications such as speech analysis. Theoreti- 
cal studies have led to a clearer understanding of the 
constraints imposed on the speech signal by the vocal 
mechanism, and have suggested means whereby speech 
signals can be represented in terms of parameters that 
have a definite and rigorous relation to articulation. 
Digital computers have made it possible to use the 
* Present address: Digital Equipment Corporation, Maynard, 
Massachusetts. 
t Present address: University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 
1 W. Koenig, H. K. Dunn, and I,. Y. Lacy, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 
17, 19 (1946). 
results of the acoustical studies in such a wizy that rapid 
and precise reduction of speech signals can be 
accomplished. 
This paper describes an attempt to utilize the findings 
of the acoustical theory to develop procedures for the 
analysis and reduction of speech signals by computer 
techniques. Since the method is based on an acoustical 
theory of speech production, it is appropriate to outline 
the essential features of such a theory before proceeding 
to a description of the analysis techniques. 
ACOUSTICAL THEORY OF SPEECH PRODUCTION 
The generally accepted theory of speech production+4 
views the speech wave as the result of acoustic excitation 
of the vocal tract by one or more sources. In the case of 
voiced sounds, there is a source at the glottis, and this 
glottal source is a quasi-periodic volume-velocity wave 
whose spectrum envelope decreases with increasing 
frequency at a rate of about 12 db/octave in the range 
300-2500 cps. The characteristics of the glottal source 
are to a large extent independent of the vocal-tract con- 
figuration anterior to the glottis. For some classes of 
sounds there may be a source of excitation of the vocal 
tract as a result of a sudden pressure release or as a 
result of turbulent air flow through a constriction or 
past the teeth or other obstructions. Such a source can 
be considered as a differential-pressure source, usually 
located in the vicinity of a vocal-tract constriction, and 
this source generally has a relatively broad and smooth 
spectrum. The spectrum Y(s) of the sound pressure 
measured at a distance from the lips as a result of a 
source of excitation whose spectrum is given by S(s) 
can be written 
P(s)=S(s) T(s) R(s). (1) 
In this equation T(s) is the transfer function of the vocal 
tract; for voiced sounds, T(s) is the ratio of the volume 
*H. Dudley, Bell System Tech. J. 19, 495 (1940). 
3 T. Chiba and M. Kajiyama, The Vowel, Its Nature and Struc- 
tare (Tokyo-Kaiseikan Publishmg Company, Ltd., Tokyo, 1941). 
4 G. Fant, Acoustic Theory of Speech Prod&ion (Mouton and 
Company, ‘s-Gravenhage, 1960). 
1725 
1726 BELL, FUJISAKI, HEINZ, STEVENS, AND HOUSE 
FIG. 1. LY nonquantitative representation of the production and 
acoustic characteristics of sl~ech sounds. In the left column are 
skctchcs of articulatory configurations in the midsagittal plane 
for three phones as indicated, tqgcther with source (solid arrows) 
and output (open arrows) locations. In adtlition each row of the 
figure show the magnitude of the source spectrum / S(jw) 1, the 
pole and xi-0 locations in the coml:les frequency plane for the 
vocal-tr-act transfer function T(s), the magnitude of the transfer 
function \7’(jw) 1, and the magnitude of the sound pressure at a 
distance in front of the face jP(jw) 1, respectively, for each repre- 
sentative articulation. In cases with prriodic (glottal) excitation, 
incomplete sets of harmonics are sho\vn together with spectrum- 
envelope curves. 
velocity at the mouth opening (and at the nostrils if 
there is coupling to the nasal cavities) to the source 
volume velocity, whereas for a noiselike or transient 
source at a constriction, T(S) is the ratio of the volume 
velocity at the mouth opening to the sound pressure of 
the source. The radiation characteristic R(s) is the ratio 
of the sound pressure at distance Y in front of the talker 
to the volume velocity at the lips, and in the frequency 
range up to about 4000 cps is given approximately by 
the result for a simple source 
R(s) = (sp/47rr)e-(8T’c), (2) 
where p= density of air and c= velocity of sound in 
air. In all of these relations, s is the complex frequency, 
and can be replaced by jw to obtain Fourier spectra, 
where w is the angular frequency. 
When the source is at the glottis and when there is no 
coupling to the nasal cavities, T(s) is characterized by 
a number of poles, and can be written 
S1Sl*SQa*. . * 
T(s)= 7 (3) (s-sJ(s-ss1*)(s-s2)(s-s2*)’ . . 
where the asterisks designate complex conjugates and 
SI, s2, . * * are the poles corresponding to the various 
vocal-tract resonances or formants. The frequencies 
and bandwidths for the poles are, of course, dependent 
on the vocal-tract configuration. For an idealized source 
spectrum envelope with a decreasing slope of 12 db/ 
octave, i.e., a spectrum envelope proportional to l/w?, 
and for a radiation characteristic proportional to w 
[cf. Eq. (2)-J, th e magnitude of the spectrum envelope 
1 PE( jw) 1 of the sound pressure for a nonnasal vowel 
is given by 
I ~E(.+J) I oI (l/w) I Ww) I. (4) 
Thus if the idealized source spectrum is assumed, the 
envelope I YE ( jw) [ is characterized by a pole in the 
vicinity of w=O and by a set of conjugate-complex 
pairs of poles, corresponding to the poles of T(s) in 
Eq. (3). Alternatively, if the sound pressure is trans- 
duced and passed through a circuit with a frequency 
characteristic that rises at 6 db/octave, the spectrum 
envelope of the resulting signal is characterized by the 
poles of T(s) and only those poles, assuming the ideal- 
ized shape for the source spectrum envelope. 
When there is coupling between the vocal tract and 
the nasal tract, or when the vocal-tract excitation is at a 
point other than the glottis, the transfer function T(s) 
is characterized by zeros as well as poles, and can, in 
general, be written 
T(s)~~~~-s~~(s-s~*)(s-sb)~s-s**~~~~ 
(s- s1) (s- s1*> (s-sq) (s- sz*). . . , (5) 
where SG, sa*, sb, sb*, * *. are the zeros and K is a real 
quantity independent of frequency. The frequencies 
and bandwidths for the zeros depend both on the vocal- 
tract configuration and on the location of the source in 
the vocal tract, whereas for a given vocal-tract con- 
figuration the poles of T(s) are independent of the loca- 
tion of the source. 
Relations between the speech spectra and the articu- 
latory processes that produce them are summarized by 
the sketches in Fig. 1 for three classes of speech sounds. 
For each class of sounds, the figure shows a typical artic- 
ulatory configuration and source location, and approxi- 
mate source spectrum, a representation of the poles and 
zeros of the transfer function, a plot of the magnitude of 
the transfer function vs frequency, and the output spec- 
trum. The spectra for the vowel and for the nasal con- 
sonant are, of course, line spectra, whereas the fricative 
has a continuous spectrum. In each case, the output 
spectrum (in decibels) is obtained by adding the spectra 
of the source and the transfer function, and then ap- 
plying a 6 db/octave correction for the radiation charac- 
teristic, as explained above. 
The acoustical theory may be summarized, therefore, 
as follows. The spectrum of the vocal-tract output (in 
decibels) is the sum of a source spectrum, a transfer 
function and a radiation characteristic. For a given class 
of speech sounds, the source spectrum and the radiation 
characteristic are relatively invariant from one talker 
to another, and are largely independent of the articu- 
latory configuration. The transfer function is deter- 
mined by the articulatory configuration and the source 
location, and is completely described in terms of a set 
of poles in the case of nonnasal vowel and vowel-like 
sounds, and by a set of poles and zeros for other classes 
of sounds. 
SPEECH ANALYSIS BY SYNTHESIS 1727 
ANALYSIS-BY-SYNTHESIS MODEL 
The term analysis by synthesis is used to refer to an 
active analysis process that can be applied to signals 
that are produced by a generator whose properties are 
kr~own.~~~ The heart of an analysis-by-synthesis system 
is a signal generator capable of synthesizing all and only 
the signals to be analyzed. The signals synthesized by 
the generator are compared with the signals to be 
analyzed, and a measure of error is computed. Different 
signals are generated until one is found that causes the 
error to reach some smallest value, at which time the 
analyzer indicates the properties of the internally gener- 
ated signal. It has been suggested6v7 that a scheme of this 
type has applications in the analysis of linguistic phe- 
nomena at various levels of representation: acoustic, 
graphic, phonological, morphological, and syntactic. Of 
concern in the present discussion is the analysis of 
linguistic events at the acoustic level. 
The procedure used to accomplish analysis by synthe- 
sis at the acoustic level’ is shown schematically in Fig. 2. 
The speech is passed first through a peripheral element 
in this case afilter set, the outputs of which are recitfied, 
smoothed, sampled at prescribed time intervals, and 
then stored. (The techniques used to process the speech 
by the filter system and to store the spectra in the com- 
puter memory are described in the Appendix.) The 
component labeled spectrum generator, when given ap- 
propriate instructions, can generate outputs that are 
compatible with the original stored speech data. In 
the present case, this component generates speechlike 
spectra when provided with information on the poles 
and zeros of the vocal-tract transfer function and on the 
type of vocal-tract excitation. The comparator computes 
a measure of the difference between the input speech 
spectra and spectra generated by the model. The order 
in which different trial spectra are synthesized by the 
model is prescribed by a control or strategy component 
that makes decisions on the basis of (1) previous error 
scores for the spectral sample under analysis, (2) the 
results of analyses of adjacent spectral samples, and 
(3) possibly the results of preliminary direct measure- 
FIG. 2. Paradigm of an analysis-by-synthesis process for the 
reduction of speech spectra. 
6 D. M. Mackay, Brit. J. Philo. Sci. 2, 105 (1951). 
s M. Halle and K. N. Stevens, “Analysis by synthesis,” Proc. 
Sem. Speech Compression and Processing, edited by W. Wathen- 
Dunn and L. E. Woods, AFCRC-TR-59-198, December 1959, 
Vol. II, Paper D7. 
7 K. N. Stevens, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 32,47 (1960). 
COMPARATOR 
FIG. 3. Paradigm of the mode of the analysis-by-synthesis re- 
duction scheme in which the experimenter controls the selection 
of parameters of the comparison spectra. The strategy or control 
element of Fig. 2 is realized by the contents of the dashed box at 
the right. The nodes A-D show points where functions can be 
selected and displayed on the cathode-ray tube output. The 
process is described fully in the text. 
ments on the spectral sample. When a synthesized spec- 
trum that provides minimum error is obtained, the 
analyzer indicates (or stores) the pole-zero locations and 
source characteristics of that spectrum. 
Five operations, therefore, are performed in the 
analyzer: (a) storage of the speech data processed by 
the input filter set, (b) generation of speech spectra, 
(c) instruction of the spectrum generator by a control 
system, (d) calculation of measures of the difference 
between the input speech spectra and the spectra com- 
puted internally, and (e) display, in some form, of the 
parameters of the generator that yield minimum error. 
The success and utility of the analysis-by-synthesis 
technique in comparison with other analysis methods 
depends largely upon the speed and accuracy with 
which speech spectra can be analyzed, and it is im- 
portant, therefore, that the number of trial spectra 
that need to be synthesized in order to obtain a mini- 
mum error be kept as small as possible. Thus one of the 
central problems in the design of an analysis-by- 
synthesis scheme is that of devising a strategy to be 
used by the control component to assure rapid conver- 
gence to the desired result. 
In the analysis procedures described here, two differ- 
ent methods have been used to implement the opera- 
tions in the strategy component of Fig. 2. In one case, 
the control function is performed by the experimenter, 
and hence the problem of specifying a strategy for auto- 
matic analysis is circumvented. In the other case a 
rudimentary strategy that permits automatic analysis 
of speech spectra is employed. The former method is 
slower than the automatic procedure, but leads to 
greater accuracy of analysis, and can be used in the 
development of strategies that might ultimately be 
incorporated into a more sophisticated automatic pro- 
cedure. The two analysis methods will be discussed in 
detail in the following sections. 
EXPERIMENTAL MATCHING OF VOWEL AND 
CONSONANT SPECTRA 
When control of the internal spectrum generator is 
placed in the hands of the experimenter, the analysis-by- 
BELL, FUJISAKI, HEINZ, STEVENS, AND HOUSE 
SAMPLING PULSES (I20/SEC) 
TIME- 
FIG. 4. Sound spectrogram of a nonsense utterance, [ha’brb]. 
The time sampling pulses (high-pass filtered) appear at the top 
of the spectrogram. 
synthesis procedure takes the form shown in Fig. 3. 
In this figure all operations indicated in the blocks, 
except the decisions and actions of the operator, are 
performed within the digital computer or its peripheral 
equipment. Instructions are communicated to the spec- 
trum generator through a typewriter that is operated 
by the experimenter. The locations (in the complex 
frequency plane) of a trial set of poles and zeros are 
typed, and the spectrum generator and filter simulation 
portions of the system compute a spectrum to be com- 
pared with the input speech spectrum that is under 
analysis. Measured or computed functions existing at 
various points in the analysis process can be displayed 
on a cathode-ray tube, as shown in the figure. The task 
of the operator is to adjust the positions of the poles 
and zeros until a “best fit” is obtained between the spec- 
trum under analysis and the internally generated spec- 
trum. The experimenter can use both a set of numerical 
error scores and visual examination of the displayed 
functions to determine how to adjust the set of poles 
and zeros in order to improve the match and to decide 
when a best fit has been obtained. 
As indicated in the Appendix, the speech spectra in 
the present analysis scheme are obtained by passing the 
speech signal through a pre-emphasis circuit with a 
rising characteristic of 6 db/octave and then through 
a bank of 36 filters. Each filter output is rectified and 
smoothed by a low-pass filter with a time constant of 
about 10 msec. The recitfied and smoothed outputs are 
sampled periodically at intervals of 8.3 msec, processed 
by an analog-to-digital converter, converted to logarith- 
mic values (to the nearest decibel), and stored in the 
computer memory. The spectral data are also stored on 
punched tape and are thus available for future analysis. 
In order to facilitate analysis of specific components of 
the utterances, conventional sound spectrograms of the 
speech materials are made. A spectrogram of a typical 
dissyllabic utterance used in one experimental study 
is shown in Fig. 4. Time pulses indicating the instants 
at which the filter outputs are sampled by the computer 
are high-pass filtered and mixed with the speech signal 
before the spectrograms are made, and appear as closely 
spaced vertical lines across the top of the spectrogram. 
The numerical identification of the pulses shown on the 
spectrogram corresponds to the way successive spectra 
are labeled in the computer memory. Thus the experi- 
menter can, if he wishes, use the spectrogram as a guide 
in the selection of a particular spectrum or group of 
spectra from the computer memory. The selection is 
achieved by a simple instruction to the computer identi- 
fying the spectrum to be displayed and analyzed. 
The manner in which the speech spectra are displayed 
is shown by the example in Fig. 5, which was taken from 
the utterance whose spectrogram is given in Fig. 4. 
The number at the upper right of the display indicates 
that the spectrum number is 48, and reference to the 
spectrogram shows that the spectrum occurred during 
the stressed vowel [I]. The points along the abscissa 
represent successive filters in the analyzing bank, and 
the ordinate is the amplitude in decibels. In terms of 
the processes portrayed by Fig. 3, this spectrum is 
found at node A. 
As described above, the experimenter specifies the 
locations of a set of poles and zeros and the internal 
spectrumgenerator computes the corresponding spectrum 
that is to be compared with a speech spectrum such as 
that shown in Fig. 5. Computation of the synthesized 
spectrum is carried out in two steps. The first step 
is to calculate the logarithm of the magnitude of the 
transfer function as a function of frequency and the 
second step is to compute the effective spectrum that 
would be measured if a signal with a spectrum corre- 
sponding to this transfer function were processed by 
the analyzing filter bank. The second step is necessary 
since the original speech signal itself is, of course, proc- 
essed by a bank of relatively broad filters, and thus a 
. >ij F; . 
..* . :. *. . . . .* 
: . . . , 
.* *. . . ..*. .* . . ‘V 
FIG. 5. Photograph of a spectral representation of an input 
speech sample (at node A in Fig. 3) displayed on the face of the 
output cathode-ray tube. Each point on the horizontal axis repre- 
sents one of the 36 filter outputs; the points on the vertical axis 
represent 5.db steps in amplitude. The input speech has received 
a 6 db/octave pre-emphasis. The number 48 identifies a sample in 
the vowel [I] in the word shown in Fig. 4. 
SPEECH ANALYSIS BY SYNTHESIS 1729 
valid comparison can be made only if both the inputsignal and the internally generated signal undergo the same 
sequence of operations. 
For a single conjugate pair of poles at frequency F, with bandwidth AF, the function to be computed in 
the internal spectrum generator during the first step is8 
20log[T,~=20log Fn’f ($AF,)’ 
[(f-W+ (3AF,)2]“1:(j+Fn)2+(3~Fn)2]: 
(10) 
where j is the frequency variable and T, is the portion 
of the system function associated with the nth pair of 
poles. The logarithm of the magnitude of the system 
function for a zero is, of course, the negative of that for 
a pole with the same frequency and bandwidth. For a 
real-axis pole at a frequency minus F,, the function to 
be computed is 
20 log{ Fal(f2+F2)t). (11) 
These functions are computed to the nearest g db at 
lOO-cps intervals of j. When more than one pole or 
zero is specified, the logarithm of the system function 
is obtained by: adding the logarithms of the system 
functions corresponding to the individual poles and 
zeros. A result of this calculation for a typical set of 
poles appropriate for a vowel is shown in Fig. 6, which 
is a photograph of the cathode-ray tube display ob- 
tained from node B in Fig. 3. Although values up to 
10 kc are displayed here, usually only the spectrum up 
to about 3000 cps is of interest for vowels. In this type 
of display a logarithmic scale is used for the abscissa. 
The second step in the computation of comparison 
spectra is the evaluation of the effect of the filter bank 
on the computed transfer function. If the magnitude of 
the transfer function of a filter is designated as 1 Ai 1, 
where i represents the filter number from 1 to 36, then 
the magnitude of the square-law rectified and smoothed 
output of the filter when the input spectrum has a 
magnitude 1 H(j) [ is proportional to 
U m l~(f)121~im2~f 1 $. (12) 0 
The difference between the result of this computation 
and the result of processing the data by full-wave recitfi- 
cation can be expected to be less than 1 db. Thirty-six 
such integrals are evaluated in the computer to obtain 
the hypothetical rectified filter outputs corresponding 
to a given input spectrum. These numbers are expressed 
in decibels to permit direct comparison with the spectra 
that are under analysis. 
The result of the filter calculation for the spectrum 
given in Fig. 6 is shown as one of the curves in Fig. 7. 
Figure 7 is an example of the display of the events at 
nodes A, C, and D in the system schematized previously 
s More precisely, AF, is l/r times the real part of the complex 
in Fig. 3. The original speech spectrum (the one pre- 
viously given in Fig. 5) and the difference curve (node 
D) are shown in addition to the internally synthesized 
spectrum (node C). The numbers at the left are three 
numerical measures of the error. 
In all of the spectrum matching procedures described 
in this report, three different error scores were computed 
and were available as measures of the goodness of fit 
between the speech spectra and the internally synthe- 
sized spectra. The error curve is represented by 36 
values (corresponding to the 36 filters) that will be 
designated as a set of numbers ei. The error curve is 
always adjusted automatically such that the weighted 
mean of ei is zero over the entire range of values of i. 
The three error measures are the following: 
Absolute error=? Iwiei) ; i=l 
Variation= 5 1 z8i+rei+r--iei [ ; 
x=1 
Square of error = g &e,2 ; a‘=1 
: : : : .:.: :: :: 
1.. , . ._ , : .:, ,: . .:.,. . . . . . :. $‘. .: .: .- - 
: ::: : : s; x;: 
: : : ..,:.,.:...:.;..:.:.:~ - ..,...., __. . .., . .., 
FIG. 6. Photograph of a computed spectrum (at node B in 
Fig. 3) displayed on the face of the output cathode-ray tube. The 
horizontal axis is a logarithmic frequency scale from 200 cps to 
10 000 cps. The vertical axis represents amplitude in decibels, the 
small points indicating I-db steps. The spectrum shown is char- 
acterized by resonant frequencies (bandwidths), in cps, of 430 (30), 
1770 (SO), 2580 (150), plus resonances every 1000 cps from 3500 
cps to 9500 cps with bandwidths gradually increasing to 300 cps. 
Datum points are plotted every 100 cps. For convenience, the 
datum points at 100 and 200 cps are both plotted close to the ^__ . . 
frequency of the pole (i.e., l/r times the distance of the pole from 
the jw axis in the s plane). When AF, is small compared with 
F,, then AF, is very nearly equal to the bandwidth. Luu-cps nne. 
1730 BELL, FUJISAKI, HEINZ, STEVENS, AND HOUSE 
. . 
48 ::*“., 
48 ,c. *.. 
1: . .> .&. . . ‘s,,,.: 
23: * 
;;‘*.*.. --. “. 
120 : 
t’..“?::::::::::.;::::“.“..- . 
FIG. 7. Photograph of output display showing superposition of 
input spectrum (upper curve of light points) and comparison 
spectrum (upper curve of heavy points) obtained at node C of 
Fig. 3. The lower curve is the difference curve, obtained at node D 
of Fig. 3. The three numbers at the left show, from top to bottom, 
the magnitude of the absolute, variation, and squared error scores 
(see text) over 24 filter points, that is, up to about 3050 cps. The 
input spectrum is sample 48 shown in Fig. 5 ; the comparison spec- 
trum is that shown in Fig. 6 after processing by the simulated 
filters. The error curve is typical of a situation in which a reso- 
nance in the comparison spectrum is improperly located. 
where wi represents arbitrary weighting factors which 
may be assigned depending on the frequency range 
considered to be important for matching a particular 
class of spectra. For example, it has been found conveni- 
ent to match vowel spectra over the values of i from 1 
to 24, corresponding to a frequency range of 100 to 
3050 cps. A simple way of weighting the error in this 
case is to put wi= 1 over i= 1 to 24, and ZPJ~= 0 over 
i=25 to 36. More sophisticated schemes for assigning 
weighting factors can, of course, be adopted. The 
variation, being a sum of first differences of the weighted 
error curve, provides an indication of the amount of 
fluctuation in the error curve, while the other two num- 
bers provide measures of the amount of deviation of the 
curve from the zero axis. The significance of the different 
measures of error will be of particular interest in the 
discussion of automatic matching procedures in the next 
section. For experimental matching of various types of 
speech spectra the square of the error has been used 
more frequently than the other measures. 
For the spectral match shown in Fig. 7, the square of 
the error, summed over 24 points in frequency, is 120 
db2. The error curve in this case has an irregularity at 
frequencies in the vicinity of the second resonance. This 
irregularity is due, apparently, to an incorrect selection 
of the frequency position of the second pole. When this 
frequency is adjusted upwards, the match between the 
two spectra would be expected to become better. 
Some indication of the sensitivity of the error scores 
to small changes in the resonant frequency in this ex- 
ample is given by the upper curve in Fig. 8. This curve 
has a reasonably sharp minimum of 30 db2 for a reso- 
nant frequency of 1870 cps. Evidently this error score 
is quite sensitive to small changes in the resonant fre- 
quency, and an accuracy better than 30 cps is to be 
expected in this case. The minimum for the variation 
error score generally is not as sharp as that for the 
squared error. Figure 8 also shows the squared error as 
a function of the frequency of F2 for a second formant 
in a lower frequency range, the second formant of the 
vowel [a]. Curves of form similar to those of Fig. 8 
have been obtained for variations in both bandwidth 
and resonant frequency in the process of matching a 
large number of vowel spectra. 
When the second resonant frequency of the internally 
generated spectrum of Fig. 7 is given the value that 
yields minimum squared error in Fig. 8, the spectral 
match shown in Fig. 9 is obtained. It is to be noted that 
a good match to the vowel spectrum shown in Fig. 9 
was obtained in the frequency range NO-3050 cps by 
synthesizing a spectrum characterized by three conju- 
gate pole pairs in this frequency range together with a 
group of poles at higher frequencies. The high-frequency 
poles must be included simply to provide the proper levels 
for the lower resonances? Since the original speech 
spectrum was pre-emphasized with a slope of 6 db/ 
octave, then, as noted previously, the spectrum enve- 
lope of the resulting signal is characterized simply by the 
set of conjugate pairs of poles of T(s), if an idealized 
source spectrum envelope with a falling characteristic 
of 12 db/octave is assumed. As a matter of fact, any 
significant deviation of the synthesized spectrum from 
the speech spectrum of Fig. 9 would indicate that the 
shape of the actual source spectrum differed from this 
ideal shape. The fact that a good match is obtained in 
this case indicates that a -12 db/octave slope is a 
reasonable approximation for the spectrum envelope of 
the glottal source.l” 
FIG. 8. Examples of 
the effect on the squared 
error score of varying 
the frequency of a 
single resonance of the 
comparison spectrum 
through a range of 
values in the vicinity of 
the actual vowel for- 
mant frequency. The 
upper graph refers to a 
sample taken centrally 
in a vowel characterized 
by a high-frequency 
second formant (sample 
48, as in Figs. 4, 5, 7). 
The lower graph rllus- 
trates the same result 
for a sample from a 
vowel with a second 
formant at a lower 
frequency. 
FREQUENCY OF F2 (Ct’S) 
g G. Fant, “On the predictability of formant levels and spectrum 
envelopes from formant frequencies,” For Roman Jakobson, edited 
by M. Halle et al. (Mouton and Company, ‘s-Gravenhage, 1956), 
pp. 109-120. 
lo The matching of a large number of spectral samples in voiced 
speech sounds has shown the same general results. These analysis 
procedures, however, are not highly sensitive to local variations 
in the shape of the glottal spectrum since the analog filters used 
in processing the speech materials are not very selective. Thus 
the form of the glottal spectrum derived by this method cannot be 
compared in detail with that derived from time-domain analyses. 
SPEECH ANALYSIS BY SYNTHESIS 1731 
By the procedure discussed above, matches have been 
obtained for a number of spectra associated with vowel 
and consonant portions of utterances by several male 
talkers. Systematic studies of the pole-zero patterns 
for various time locations through these utterances have 
been made” and detailed reports are in preparation. 
Examples of the matches obtained for three classes of 
speech sounds other than nonnasal vowels are shown in 
Fig. 10. In all cases it was possible to select a set of poles 
and zeros such that good fits were obtained with the 
data. In the matching of a spectrum such as one of these, 
the initial step was to determine the approximate loca- 
tions of the poles and zeros from theoretical considera- 
tions and by examination of the general shape of the 
spectrum. Convergence to pole and zero locations yield- 
ing an optimum fit was achieved through a trial-and- 
error process, always with the constraint that the loca- 
tions be consistent with known theoretical relations 
between vocal-tract configurations and the acoustic 
signal. 
AUTOMATIC MATCHING OF VOWEL SPECTRA; 
THE STRATEGY PROBLEM 
Although application of the spectrum-matching tech- 
nique described above usually resulted in good agree- 
ment between the speech spectra and the synthesized 
spectra, and, presumably, in reasonably accurate values 
for spectral poles and zeros, the method has the dis- 
advantage that it is tedious and is not completely auto- 
matic. Attempts have been made, therefore, to reduce 
the time required for the generation of comparison 
spectra and to program the computer to perform the 
function of the experimenter in the analysis scheme of 
Fig. 3. The task of developing an optimum strategy 
whereby rapid convergence to a best-fitting vowel 
spectrum is achieved is by no means trivial, and is an 
example of the hill-climbing problem that has received 
considerable attention in the field of pattern recogni- 
tion.12 The strategy that is used in the present automatic 
FIG. 9. Photograph of a display such as that described in Fig. 7, 
showing a good match between the input and comparison spectra. 
To obtain this match to the vowel [I] the values of the lowest four 
resonant frequencies (bandwidths), in cps, of the comparison spec- 
trum were430 (30), 1870 (80), 2580 (lSO),.and 3400 (120); addi- 
tional resonances were spaced at lOOf-cps Intervals from 4500 to 
9500 cps with gradually increasing bandwidths up to 300 cps. 
r1 A. S. House, K. N. Stevens! and H. Fujisaki, J. Acoust. Sot. 
Am. 32, 1517 (1960): I. M. Heinz, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 32, 1517 
(196O);‘O. Fujimura,‘j. Acoust. Sdc: Am. 32, 1517 (1960). 
r2 M. Minsky, Proc. Inst. Radio Engrs. 49, 8 (1961). 
FIG. 10. Photographs of matches 
similar to that of Fig. 7 for spectra of 
speech sounds other than nonnasal 
vowels. The upper photograph shows 
a match to a (nasalized) vowel [1:] 
occurring in the phonetic environment 
[m-m]. The comparison curve was 
constructed from three poles (and 
their conjugates) up to 3200 cps, a 
correction for higher poles, and a 
pole-zero pair in the vicinity of 1200 
cps; the error scores were computed 
over 24 filters.r6 The middle ohoto- 
graph is a match to the fricatcve [S] 
in initial position in a stressed syllable. 
In this case the error score was com- 
puted over 36 filters up to 7000 cps 
and the comparison curve was con- 
structed from seven poles, three zeros, 
and three real-axis zeros close to zero 
frequency. l1 In the lower photograph 
the speech spectrum was sampled 
from an [n] in word final position 
and the error score was computed 
over 24 filters. The comparison curve 
was constructed from five poles and 
a zero up to 3000 cps, plus a higher- 
pole correction.” 
23 : 
. 
8' 
.:-$ i 
32 : 
. .h 
.: . ‘,##: ‘; 
‘i’ 
33 :+c*--- 
44 : 
18 
27 
22 
. ,::‘, Q . . . . 
..I* : : **a ’ .(“1”W’ ; ,. - . :. .:’ . . : . . *-.. *.. -. ,:‘~.:,.,~,“‘,:,,‘.)‘........ “... 
matching scheme is a rather elementary one ; more com- 
plex strategies are being developed to obtain more ac- 
curate and rapid analyses.13J4 The automatic method 
to be described is applicable only to the analysis of the 
spectra of nonnasal vowels. 
Generation of Comparison Spectra 
In the experimental analysis procedure described 
above, each internally generated spectrum is computed 
as needed, and the integrations to simulate the effect 
of the filter bank are performed for each trial spectrum. 
The calculation of each pole factor and the simulation 
of the filtering of the synthesized spectra are the most 
time-consuming portions of the above method, however, 
and automation of the matching procedure would not 
be practical unless the time required for these operations 
was reduced. A more rapid (but less precise) procedure 
for the generation of comparison spectra was therefore 
adopted. In this procedure the comparison spectra 
are assembled from a limited set of elemental spectra 
that are stored within the computer memory. 
Five elemental spectra are added to obtain the spec- 
trum envelope of a vowel (in decibels) in the frequency 
range that includes the first three vocal-tract resonances 
(up to about 3000 cps for adult male voices). Four of 
these spectra are simple resonance curves each of which 
corresponds to a conjugate pair of poles of the vocal- 
tract transfer function. An inventory of 78 simple reso- 
nance curves is stored in the computer memory with 
resonant frequencies spaced every 20 cps from 160 to 
r3 A. Paul, SM. thesis (unpublished), M.I.T. (1961). 
r4 M. V. Mathews (personal communication, 1961). 
1732 BELL, FUJISAKI, HEINZ, STEVENS, AND HOUSE 
500 cps, every 50 cps from 500 to 3000 cps, and every 
100 cps from 3000 to 4000 cps. The bandwidth of the 
resonance associated with each of these curves is fixed 
at a value suggested by measured data on formant 
bandwidth; it is 60 cps for the low-frequency resonances 
and increases to 180 cps for the high-frequency reso- 
nances. Vowel spectra with various combinations of 
resonances can be assembled by selection of appropriate 
groups of four such curves. The fifth elemental spectrum 
is a curve that, in the frequency range of the first three 
vocal-tract resonances, accounts for the source spectrum, 
the radiation characteristic, and poles of the vocal-tract 
transfer function higher than the fourth. This “correc- 
tion” spectrum is a relatively smooth curve, and its 
shape is not expected to change markedly from one 
adult male speaker to another or from one vowel to 
another, although some variation in the slope of the 
curve may occur. An inventory of six such correction 
spectra is stored in the computer memory, and one of 
these is always added to the group of four resonance 
curves to synthesize a complete vowel spectrum. 
The 84 elemental spectra that are stored in the com- 
puter memory are actually the curves that would be 
obtained if each of the simple resonance spectra and 
correction spectra were processed by the filter bank in 
the manner discussed above [Eq. (12)]. The elimination 
of the necessity of spectrum calculation and filter 
simulation greatly reduces the time required for the 
generation of comparison spectra (by a factor of about 
50 in the present case), but it inevitably leads to some 
error in the synthesized spectra, especially at high 
frequencies where the filter bandwidths are not constant. 
Correction for the primary effect of the filter bandwidths 
can be made, and is actually included in the above pro- 
cedure. It can be shown, however, that compensation 
for this error cannot be made exactly, especially for 
cases in which two resonances are closely spaced. Conse- 
quently this procedure for assembling vowel spectra 
has some inherent error, although this error is usually 
quite small. 
Description of Strategy 
From the 84 stored elemental curves, it is possible to 
assemble about .5X lo5 vowel-like spectra, if reasonable 
assumptions are made concerning the frequency range 
for each of the first four formants. Since in the analysis 
of a given speech spectrum it is impractical to make a 
comparison with each of these synthesized spectra, it 
is essential to devise a strategy whereby only a small 
subset of comparison spectra needs to be assembled 
and tested before convergence to the best-fitting spec- 
trum is achieved. It is possible to distinguish two situa- 
tions that require different strategies. One situation 
arises when no prior information is available concerning 
the formant frequencies for the vowel spectrum under 
analysis, and/or when no previous data have been ob- 
tained for the talker who generated the utterance in 
which this spectrum occurs. Such a case would occur 
when, in the analysis of the formant frequencies during 
the vowel portion of a syllable, one spectrum is selected 
to be examined first. Here the basic task of the analyzer 
is to establish a good first approximation to the input 
spectrum. In the second situation, which occurs much 
more frequently than the first, approximate data con- 
cerning the formant frequencies and the appropriate 
correction spectrum are already available in the an- 
alyzer. These data may have been obtained either from 
analysis of a spectrum sample located adjacent to the 
spectrum to be analyzed or from a preliminary approxi- 
mate analysis of the spectrum. In this case, the task of 
the analyzer is to optimize the match between the input 
and the synthesized spectra. 
When there is no prior knowledge of the locations 
of the formants, one method that has been used to 
establish the approximate values of the formant fre- 
quencies consists of the following steps: (1) Elemental 
spectra corresponding to formant frequencies in the 
expected range of F1 (plus a standard Fq curve and a 
standard correction curve) are each compared with the 
speech spectrum to be analyzed, and the curve yielding 
the minimum variation error is selected tentatively as 
identifying F1. (2) Elemental spectra corresponding to 
formant frequencies in the expected range of Fz are each 
added in turn to the curve found in (1) and the com- 
posite curve yielding the minimum variation error is 
selected tentatively as identifying Fz. (3) Step (2) is 
repeated to find tentative values for F+ (4) After ap- 
proximate values for the first three formant frequencies 
are found in this way, elemental spectra corresponding 
to formant frequencies in the expected range of Fd are 
each added in place of the standard Fb curve adopted in 
previous steps, and the one yielding the minimum error 
score is found. (5) Step (4) is repeated to find the cor- 
rection curve yielding the minimum error score. (6) The 
set of first four formant frequencies and the correction 
curve found by the above procedures are then used as 
starting points for the more exact analysis procedure 
that is employed when approximate data of this type 
are available. 
It is to be noted that in the first step above, no ele- 
mental spectra corresponding to Fz and Fa are included 
in the synthesized spectrum. It can be shown, neverthe- 
less, that the variation error score can serve to locate 
the approximate position of the lowest resonance in 
the input spectrum. The squared error score can give 
reliable results only after a reasonable approximation to 
the input spectrum is established, and is not a good 
criterion at this stage of the preliminary analysis. 
Throughout the automatic procedures pertaining to 
the analysis of vowels produced by adult male talkers 
error scores were computed with equal weighting for the 
24 filters in the frequency range 100-3050 cps. 
In the process of developing the preliminary analysis 
procedure outlined above, various alternative schemes 
for obtaining a first approximation to the formant fre- 
SPEECH ANALYSIS BY SYNTHESIS 1733 
quencies were tried. In one such scheme the spectrum 
of a neutral vowel, i.e., F1=500 cps with subsequent 
formants occurring at intervals of 1000 cps, was used as 
the zero-order approximation, and the frequency posi- 
tions of the formants were revised successively within 
appropriate ranges. Another scheme involved the match- 
ing of the input spectrum against members of a small 
stored set of standard vocalic spectra and the selection 
of the best approximation. A third procedure obtained 
estimates of approximate values of formant frequencies 
from direct measurements of certain gross features of 
the input spectrum. l5 Further studies with a large num- 
ber of talkers and utterances will be required before the 
over-all performance of these various preliminary 
analysis procedures (or possibly combinations of them) 
can be compared quantitatively. 
When approximate values for the formant frequencies 
and correction spectrum are available, an iterative pro- 
cedure is employed, and the sequence of operations is 
the following: (1) With Fz, Fa, Fd, and the correction 
spectrum fixed at the given values, curves with resonant 
frequencies in the vicinity of the given F1 are used to 
form a series of spectra that are compared with the 
speech spectrum to be analyzed. The value of F1 yielding 
the minimum squared error is selected and used in subse- 
quent steps. (2) Step (1) is repeated but with F1, F3, 
Fd, and the correction spectrum at the given values and 
Fz as the variable. (3) Step (1) is repeated to find, in 
turn, revised values for Fs, Fq and the correction spec- 
trum. (4) Steps (l)-(3) are repeated. If the results are 
the same as those obtained after the first set of trials, 
the analysis of the given spectrum is terminated ; 
otherwise the process is repeated until no improvement 
in the fit is obtained. 
The automatic method for the analysis of vowels has 
been used to obtain data on the variation with time of 
the formant frequencies of stressed vowels in a number 
of dissyllabic utterances. The computer has been pro- 
grammed to perform the analysis on each spectral 
sample in turn within a designated region of the utter- 
ance. The initial step in the procedure is to prescribe 
the range of spectral samples over which the analysis 
is to be performed and to select a sample located cen- 
trally within this range. The analysis is first carried out 
on the centrally located sample, following one of the 
procedures that require no a priori knowledge of the 
approximate formant frequencies. The more precise 
iterative procedure is then applied to this sample to 
locate the formant frequencies and correction spectrum 
more exactly. These values of formant frequencies and 
correction spectrum are used as first approximations in 
the analysis of the following spectral sample. In this 
manner the analysis is performed on each spectral 
sample in turn until the end of the designated interval 
is reached. Then the program returns to the centrally 
located sample, and uses the results previously obtained 
I6 F. Poza, S.M. thesis (unpublished), M.I.T. (1959). 
“35 40 45 50 55 60 65 
SPECTRAL SAMPLES 
FIG. 11. Display of data on vowel formant frequencies derived 
by the automatic analysis procedure. The utterance is the same 
as that shown in Fig. 4. Time is on the horizontal axis and is indi- 
cated in terms of samples which occur at 8.3.msec intervals. The 
solid points represent the lowest three vowel formants in each 
sample as determined by the automatic procedure. The open 
points at the top of the figure give a measure of the error of fit 
between the input and comparison spectra. The arrows indicate 
points in time where study of the spectrogram of the utterance 
(see Fig. 4) suggests the locations of vocalic boundaries. 
for this sample as first approximations to the next pre- 
ceding sample. The analysis is carried out on each pre- 
ceding sample moving toward the beginning of the desig- 
nated time interval. The results for each spectral sample 
are stored in the computer memory. After the analysis 
of all samples is completed, an instruction can be given 
to the computer to print or punch out the results of 
the analysis of each sample in order, or to display the 
results on the oscilloscope in various ways. 
Typical Results 
Figure 11 displays typical results of the automatic 
vowel analysis program for a portion of the utterance 
whose spectrogram is shown in Fig. 4. The first three 
formant frequencies found by the program are plotted 
for each spectral sample in the stressed vowel. The 
squared error score for each sample is also shown in 
the upper part of the figure. The arrows indicate the 
“vowel” boundaries suggested by study of the spectro- 
gram. It is noted that the error score increases sharply 
at these boundaries, since it is not possible, of course, 
to obtain good matches with consonant spectra by as- 
sembling a set of simple resonance curves by a procedure 
based on a theory of vowel production. 
Several limitations of the automatic procedurezhave 
already been pointed out, and further studies will be 
necessary to overcome these limitations. The automatic 
analysis procedure in its present form requires that 
many trials be made before convergence to a set of 
resonant frequencies is achieved, and consequently the 
1734 BELL, FUJISAKI, HEINZ, STEVENS, AND HOUSE 
analysis takes a considerable amount of time (order of 
1000 times real time for the computer and the programs 
used in these studies). Furthermore, small but syste- 
matic errors in formant locations occur as a result of 
(a) the incomplete correction for the effect of the filters 
in the construction of the comparison spectrum and 
(b) the inability to vary the bandwidths of the formants. 
Both of these types of errors can be eliminated if a 
more complex and time-consuming procedure is used 
to assemble the spectra, similar to the procedure used 
in the experimental method described in connection 
with Fig. 3. If, however, formant bandwidth were a 
variable in the matching process, then a more detailed 
strategy would be necessary to converge to both the 
frequencies and the bandwidths appropriate to a given 
spectral sample.13 
Remarks on Extension of Automatic Analysis 
Procedure to Other Classes of 
Speech Spectra 
The automatic speech reduction procedure just de- 
scribed is applicable only to spectra of nonnasal vowels 
or vowel-like sounds for which the vocal-tract transfer 
function is characterized by a set of conjugate pairs of 
poles. Thus for the matching of these types of spectra 
the internal spectrum generator in Fig. 2 need be in- 
structed simply to synthesize spectra corresponding to 
a product of terms each of which represents a conjugate 
pair of poles. On the other hand, completely automatic 
procedures for reduction of spectra other than those of 
vowels or vowel-like sounds have not yet been de- 
veloped. This lack of progress stems largely from the 
fact that the generation of these other classes of sounds 
is not yet understood in detail. While it is known, for 
example, that spectra occurring during the production 
of nasal, stop, and fricative consonants are characterized 
by zeros as well as poles, the numbers of zeros and poles 
required and the frequency ranges to be expected for 
each cannot be specified easily and systematically on 
the basis of present knowledge. 
The spectrum of a nasalized vowel, for example, is 
characterized by about four poles and one zero in the 
frequency range up to 3000 cps,16J7 but the problem of 
devising a strategy that would lead to automatic match- 
ing of such a spectrum is a formidable one. If the posi- 
tions of the four poles and zero were varied independ- 
ently, a large number of combinations would have to be 
tried, but in order to avoid erroneous results these 
should include only those combinations that could in 
fact represent outputs of a vocal tract. To meet this 
requirement constant reference to articulation would 
have to be made during the process of searching for 
suitable pole-zero combinations. 
IsO. Fujimura, “Analysis of nasalized vowels,” Quart. Progr. 
Rept. 62, Research Laboratory of Electronics, M.I.T. (1961). 
pp. 191-192. 
I7 Reference 4, pp. 148 ff. 
In view of these complications it is suggested that 
the strategy in an automatic analysis-by-synthesis pro- 
cedure that is applicable to all types of spectra should 
consist of a search for parameters that are more directly 
related to articulation than are the pole-zero locations. 
In effect, the proposed strategy would require a search 
through a set of articulatory configurations. For each 
trial configuration the pole-zero locations, and hence 
the over-all spectrum, would be computed and com- 
pared with the spectrum under analysis. Different ar- 
ticulatory configurations would be tried until a spectrum 
yielding a best fit with the input spectrum was ob- 
tained. Thus in the case of matching the spectrum of a 
nasalized vowel, the strategy would try different vowel 
configurations and different amounts of coupling to the 
nasal cavities until an optimum spectral match was 
obtained. 
The realization of this type of analysis scheme re- 
quires that a model be developed for specifying articu- 
latory configurations in a simple yet meaningful way. 
Although various simple models have already been pro- 
posed18-20 it is clear that much must be learned con- 
cerning articulatory constraints and the relations be- 
tween articulation and the acoustic output before a 
suitable strategy for the automatic reduction of all 
kinds of speech spectra is developed. 
DISCUSSION 
Analysis-by-synthesis procedures for the reduction of 
speech spectra have been used in one form or another 
by several investigators. Early attempts to use a spec- 
trum matching technique were reported by Steinberg21 
and by Lewis,22 who matched simple resonance curves 
to vowel spectra in the vicinity of the spectral peaks. 
The method was carried much further by Fant,4v23 who 
demonstrated how the spectra associated with simple 
linear circuits can be matched against vowel and conso- 
nant spectra. In Fant’s studies, the experimenter can 
be said to have been situated within the feedback loop 
(as in Fig. 3 above) and the comparison spectra were 
either computed or measured from simple analog cir- 
cuits. The goodness of fit was assessed by visual exami- 
nation of the curves. Similar procedures were used by 
Heinz and Stevens24 for the matching of the spectra of 
fricative consonants. Matching of the spectra of several 
vowels was achieved by Mathews, Miller, and David,25 
who used digital computer techniques for the analysis 
I8 Reference 4, pp. 71 ff. 
I9 K. N. Stevens and A. S. House, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 27, 484 
(1955). 
2o 0. Fujimura (personal communication, 1960). 
21 J. C. Steinberg, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 6, 16 (1934). 
n D. Lewis, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 8, 91 (1936). 
s3 C. G. M. Fant, “Transmission properties of the vocal tract, 
II.” Quart. Progr. Rept. Acoustics Laboratory, M.I.T. (Oct.- 
Dec. 1950), pp. 14-19. 
24 J. M. Heinz and K. N. Stevens, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 33, 589 
(1961). 
26 M. V. Mathews, J. E. Miller, and E. E. David, Jr., J. Acoust. 
Sot. Am. 33, 179 (1961). 
SPEECH ANALYSIS BY SYNTHESIS 1735 
of spectra computed from individual periods of the glot- 
tal output. They devised procedures for finding a set 
of poles corresponding to the vocal-tract transfer func- 
tion and zeros to approximate the detailed form of the 
glottal spectrum such that best fits were obtained with 
the spectra under analysis. By performing a “pitch 
synchronous” analysis, they were able to obtain a rather 
detailed picture of the characteristics of the glottal 
excitation as well as the vocal-tract resonances, although 
the procedure was complicated by the necessity for 
adjusting a large number of parameters in order to con- 
verge to a best fit. The principles of the active speech 
analysis procedure have also been enunciated by Ino- 
mata, who, in connection with a program concerned 
with automatic speech recognition, has used computer 
techniques to search for a set of poles that yield a spec- 
trum that matches a given vowel spectrum. 
Whereas the methods just summarized, as well as 
those described in this paper, involve the matching of 
speech spectra and thus are carried out in the frequency 
domain, analysis procedures based on the same principle 
can also be applied in the time domain. The “inverse 
filtering” techniques described by Millerz7 involve the 
processing of the vowel sounds by a cascaded set of 
filters that are characterized by a set of conjugate pairs 
of zeros. When the frequencies of the zeros are ad- 
justed to coincide with those of the poles that describe 
the vocal-tract transfer function for the vowel, then the 
output of the filters represents the waveform of the 
glottal source. Since the general shape of the glottal 
pulse is known, then a procedure can be devised for 
adjusting the zeros until the expected shape is obtained. 
The processing of the signal by a cascaded sequence of 
filters in the time domain is analogous to subtracting 
elemental resonance spectra (in decibels) from the 
speech spectrum. It would appear difficult, however, to 
devise an automatic analysis procedure based on time- 
domain methods, since criteria for optimum cancellation 
of a pole by a zero might be difficult to devise. 
The various versions of analysis-by-synthesis or 
feedback methods of speech spectrum analysis such as 
those that have been described here and by others are 
considered to have important advantages over other 
analysis schemes. For the feedback analysis method, 
once a set of parameters is found such that a good 
replica of the input signal is generated when these 
parameters are applied as instructions to the internal 
generative model, then there is little question that this 
set constitutes an adequate representation of the input. 
In contrast to this method are the passive or open-loop 
analysis procedures in which simple attributes of the 
spectra, such as the major spectral peaks, are measured 
directly and are used to provide a simple representation 
of the speech signal. There is no assurance in these cases 
that important data have not been discarded or that 
26 S. Inomata, Bull, Electra-Tech. Lab. (Tokyo) 24, 597 (1960). 
27 K. L. Miller, J. Acoust. Sot. Am. 31, 667 (1959). 
an error has not been made in the extraction of a par- 
ticular parameter. 
Other potential advantages of the feedback analysis 
procedure stem from the fact that it permits certain 
quasi-invariant features of the speech signal to be ac- 
counted for in a relatively straightforward manner. 
Thus, in principle, once certain properties of a given 
talker, such as the spectrum of the glottal output or 
the approximate range of variation of his formant fre- 
quencies, have been evaluated, then these properties 
can be assumed to remain relatively unchanged over a 
period of time, and the strategy during this period is 
simplified. In a sense, the method is geared to the ex- 
traction of features of the signal that are changing, and 
spends little time on the extraction of features that do 
not change or that change only slowly. 
The similarity between an analysis-by-synthesis pro- 
cedure and certain aspects of human perception have led 
several investigators to speculate that man manipulates 
sensory data such as speech by an active internal repli- 
cation process.s-7~26,28~2g If there is any basis for such 
speculation, then analysis techniques of the type de- 
scribed here would have the additional advantage that 
they bear at least some resemblance to the process of 
human speech reception. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors have profited from stimulation, counsel 
and technical assistance contributed by their associates. 
Discussions with Osamu Fujimura have particularly 
influenced the course of the research. Ideas contributed 
by George Rosen and Faust0 Poza are also acknowl- 
edged with gratitude, as is the criticism and encourage- 
ment of Morris Halle, the programming aid of Paul T. 
Brady and the technical assistance of Jane Arnold. 
Finally, the work would not have been possible without 
the availability of the TX-O computer, a facility of the 
Department of Electrical Engineering, M.I.T., and the 
cooperation and help of its technical staff. 
This work was supported in part by the U. S. Army 
Signal Corps, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, 
and the Office of Naval Research ; and in part by the 
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories. 
APPENDIX : SPEECH INPUT SYSTEM 
Sampled speech data are introduced into the computer 
in spectral form using equipment the block diagram of 
which is shown in Fig. 12. Speech is recorded on one 
channel of a two-channel magnetic tape loop and samp- 
ling pulses are recorded on the other channel. The speech 
is played back through a pre-emphasis network into a 
28 G. A. Miller, E. Galanter, and K. H. Pribram, Plans and the 
.Tt~z~tzc~e sf B&&r (Nenry Holt and Company, New York, 
1960). 
29 L. .\. Chistovich, Soviet Phys.-.koustics 6, 393 (1961); 
[.\kust. Zhur. 6, 392 (1960)]. 
1736 BELL, FUJISAKI, HEINZ, STEVENS, AND HOUSE 
1 I 
RECTIFER CONVERSION 
- AND 4 
ANALOG- 1 
SMOOTHING TO - OlGlTAL -+. 
CIRCVIT CONVERTER 1 
TO - STORE 0 
DECIBELS ; DISPLAY 
I 
I 
L- _____ $?!P_U:_ER--_I 
FIG. 12. Block diagram of the pro- 
cedure used in preparing speech mate- 
rials for computer analysis. 
PULSE 
SEPARATOR I 
ClRC”lT LOOP COMPLETION PULSE 
I 
SAMPLING PULSES 
bank of 36 simple-tuned filters. The pre-emphasis net- 
work has a rising frequency characteristic of 6 db/oc- 
tave. The center frequencies of the filters range from 
150 to 7025 cps and are selected so that the half-power 
points of adjacent filters are coincident. The filter band- 
widths are constant at 100 cps for center frequencies up 
to 1550 cps and then increase gradually until reaching 
a value of 475 cps for a center frequency of 7025 cps. 
During the read-in process, the outputs of the filters 
are selected in sequence by a stepping switch that steps 
after each cycle of the tape loop. Thus the loop is 
played 36 times to obtain a complete spectral analysis 
of the speech sample. The selected filter output is full- 
wave rectified and smoothed before being converted 
from analog to digital form. A commercial analog-to- 
digital encoder performs this conversion. 
The second tape channel contains recorded control 
pulses. A pulse train of positive polarity in which the 
pulses occur every 8.3 msec is used to indicate times at 
which the data are to be sampled. A train of opposite 
polarity marks the end of the tape loop and initiates the 
stepping switch. These control pulses enter two light- 
pen flip-flop registers of the computer, so that the samp- 
ling can then be controlled by the computer. 
The computer is programmed to search the light-pen 
flip-flop registers for “sample” pulses and to transfer 
data from the encoder when such a pulse appears. The 
filter outputs are encoded into 10 bits and are read into 
the computer, where the data are then converted into 
decibels, encoded into six bits, and rearranged so that 
three samples are stored in each B-bit memory register. 
Thus each group of 12 registers contains outputs of 
the 36 filters at one sample time. Successive groups of 
12 registers contain speech spectra at successive 8.3- 
msec intervals. With the present 8192-word memory, 
3648 registers are used for data storage, and thus ap- 
proximately 2.5 seconds of speech can be processed. 
The program provides routines that allow the data to be 
displayed on an oscilloscope or punched out on paper 
tape for later use. In addition, several error-checking 
routines are built into the program to maintan the ac- 
curacy of the read-in process. 