MPEG-4 Structured Audio  Mailing List Archive: saol-users:

Soft vs. Hard (was RE: Saol acceptance.)

From: Dana Massie (dana@FluxNetwork.com)
Date: Sat Jan 20 2001 - 15:51:55 EST

Next message: M. Edward Borasky: "RE: Soft vs. Hard (was RE: Saol acceptance.)"
Previous message: Bert Schiettecatte: "Re: Saol acceptance."
In reply to: Bert Schiettecatte: "Re: Saol acceptance."

Next in thread: M. Edward Borasky: "RE: Soft vs. Hard (was RE: Saol acceptance.)"
Reply: M. Edward Borasky: "RE: Soft vs. Hard (was RE: Saol acceptance.)"

Messages sorted by: 
[ date ]
[ thread ]
[ subject ]
[ author ]

This is a wonderful debate, which I have participated in from both ends for

10 years.

Software synthesis has the promise of providing far more powerful,

incredibly flexible synthesis methods.  In theory, user interfaces for soft

synthesis have more opportunities for innovation: excellent displays,

generalized mapping networks, "Global Editing", Timbre Spaces, Neural

Network training algorithms - you name it!

Databases of sounds with descriptive categories, indexing sounds and timbres

by example; research is going on in all of these areas.

Of course, soft synthesis to date has been hobbled by "the complexity

barrier" - that invisible wall that users and programmers hit, sometimes

without understanding what they hit, which then halts their productivity.  A

whistle sometimes is the best instrument.  There are no linker errors, no

blue screens, low latency (except for nice understandable oscillation build

ups), and no cables to hook up!

Soft synthesis will come of age when it finally becomes invisible; when

musicians make music that could not have been made by a fixed hardware

synthesizer, and nobody even mentions that it came from a software

synthesizer.  They just mention how good the music is.

-dana

Dana C. Massie FluxNetwork, Inc.

Mobile: 831.234.0479    Main: 831.423.1695   Fax: 831.423.1638

Dana@FluxNetwork.com          www.FluxNetwork.com

435 Front Street

Santa Cruz, CA 95061-1205

Privileged/Confidential Information may be contained in this message.  If

you are not the addressee indicated in this message (or responsible for

delivery of the message to such person), you may not copy or deliver this

message to anyone.  In such a case, you should destroy this message and

kindly notify the sender by reply e-mail.

Next message: M. Edward Borasky: "RE: Soft vs. Hard (was RE: Saol acceptance.)"
Previous message: Bert Schiettecatte: "Re: Saol acceptance."
In reply to: Bert Schiettecatte: "Re: Saol acceptance."

Next in thread: M. Edward Borasky: "RE: Soft vs. Hard (was RE: Saol acceptance.)"
Reply: M. Edward Borasky: "RE: Soft vs. Hard (was RE: Saol acceptance.)"

Messages sorted by: 
[ date ]
[ thread ]
[ subject ]
[ author ]

This archive was generated by hypermail 2b29 
: Mon Jan 28 2002 - 11:46:41 EST
